Portfolio / Penguin
An imprint of Penguin Random House LLC
penguinrandomhouse.com
Copyright © 2023 by Ryan Holiday
Penguin Random House supports copyright. Copyright fuels creativity, encourages diverse voices,
promotes free speech, and creates a vibrant culture. Thank you for buying an authorized edition of
this book and for complying with copyright laws by not reproducing, scanning, or distributing any
part of it in any form without permission. You are supporting writers and allowing Penguin Random
House to continue to publish books for every reader.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Holiday, Ryan, author.
Title: The daily dad : 366 meditations on parenting, love and raising great kids / Ryan Holiday.
Description: [New York, NY] : Portfolio/Penguin, [2023]
Identifiers: LCCN 2022051010 (print) | LCCN 2022051011 (ebook) | ISBN 9780593539057
(hardcover) | ISBN 9780593539064 (ebook)
Subjects: LCSH: Parenting. | Parenting—Quotations. | Fathers. | Parent and child.
Classification: LCC HQ755.8 .H6345 2023 (print) | LCC HQ755.8 (ebook) | DDC 649/.1—
dc23/eng/20230209
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2022051010
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2022051011
Cover design: Brian Lemus
Book design by Daniel Lagin, adapted for ebook by Estelle Malmed
pid_prh_6.0_143544563_c0_r1
First say to yourself what you would be;
and then do what you have to do.
—EPICTETUS
CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
JANUARY
TEACH BY EXAMPLE (THE ONLY METHOD THAT WORKS)
FEBRUARY
LOVE UNCONDITIONALLY (THE ONLY THING THEY REALLY WANT)
MARCH
PUT YOUR FAMILY FIRST (WORK, FAMILY, SCENE: PICK TWO)
APRIL
MASTER YOUR EMOTIONS (LESSONS IN PATIENCE AND SELF-CONTROL)
MAY
CHARACTER IS FATE (LESSONS IN RIGHT AND WRONG)
JUNE
DON’T NEGLECT YOURSELF (LESSONS IN SELF-CARE)
JULY
HELP THEM BECOME WHO THEY ARE (LESSONS IN NURTURING AND DISCOVERY)
AUGUST
ALWAYS BE A FAN (THE GREATEST GIFT YOU CAN GIVE THEM)
SEPTEMBER
RAISE A READER (LESSONS IN LEARNING AND CURIOSITY)
OCTOBER
STRUGGLE AND EMERGE (HOW TO RAISE THEIR RESILIENCE)
NOVEMBER
GIVE THANKS AND BUILD BONDS (LESSONS IN GRATITUDE AND CONNECTION)
DECEMBER
TIME FLIES (YOU COULD LEAVE LIFE RIGHT NOW)
_143544563_
INTRODUCTION
A lot of people have kids. Not enough people are parents.
It might seem like having a kid is what makes you a mother or a father,
but we all know it isn’t. There are plenty of people who take their kids to
school, buy them clothes, put food in their bellies, give them a warm bed to
sleep in  .  .  . but who are not really parents. They act more like legal
guardians, checking boxes to get through the day . . . and the first eighteen
years.
That is not parenting. That is the minimum.
It’s a sad fact that some don’t even manage to get there. They seem to
think that their obligation ends at conception or birth or the day their
divorce papers are signed.
Procreating is biological. Parenting is psychological. It’s a decision. A
conscious choice. A commitment—commitment to actually change who
you are and what your priorities should be for the benefit and betterment of
your children. Commitment to sacrifice and service and the real work of
making hard decisions, of loving, not just having.
Being a parent is the choice to make your children if not the center of
your life, then central to your life, embracing the fact that bringing these
little people into the world has changed everything about who you are, what
you value, what your duties are.
A person with kids does enough to stay on the right side of Child
Protective Services . . . or to avoid the raised eyebrows of their neighbors.
A parent makes a commitment to a set of timeless principles that can feel
like clichés but are rare enough in practice to be noticed when someone
actually lives by them. You know, put your family first, love
unconditionally, be present, help them be who they’re meant to be, lead by
example, take nothing for granted, live with gratitude.
Let’s be clear: this is a modern choice. It’s not an exaggeration to say that
just a few generations ago, keeping your kids alive was about all that was
expected. A child was seen as a future asset that began as a liability, another
set of hands to help work the land on the family farm or a warm body to slot
in on the line at the local factory and draw wages to help make ends meet.
Even the early years of the twentieth century were still a gauntlet of
obstacles defined by mortality and infirmity. If all your kids made it
through, it was a bona fide miracle. That you had a responsibility to care for
them emotionally? To love them unconditionally? Please, who had the
time? Or the ability?
There is a story about Winston Churchill, who was by no means a perfect
father but had been raised by two self-absorbed and preoccupied aristocratic
parents, themselves products of Victorian England. One evening, while
talking to his son, Randolph, late into the night during a school holiday, a
thought struck Churchill. “You know, my dear boy,” he said with a kind of
forlorn amusement, “I think I have talked to you more in these holidays
than my father talked to me in the whole of his life.” It was not only not an
exaggeration but far from uncommon—and for many years after continued
to be common. It may well be relatable to you and your own childhood.
How sad that is! Not just for the children but for the parents too.
For generations and generations, parents—especially fathers—were
deprived of the most rewarding and beautiful thing in the world: being
involved in the lives of their children. Loving them not just generally but
actively, on a daily basis. The flip side of a patriarchal culture that burdened
women with the whole of domestic life has been the soft bigotry of low
expectations for men at home and with their children. Loving and being
loved? Understanding and being understood? Nobody taught it to men.
Nobody demanded it of fathers.
Again, think about how different history might have been if more parents
had been parents. If [insert villain] had been raised better. If [insert greedy
businessman] had been made to feel enough. If [insert heartbreaking victim]
had been protected. If [insert anonymous nobody] had been equipped to
fulfill their potential. If somebody had told [insert powerful person] they
were proud of them.
While we can’t change that traumatic past, we can write a better future.
That’s the philosophy that underpins this book.
Despite the flaws of generations past, parenting is one of those beautiful
experiences that links us, in an unbroken chain, back thousands and
thousands of years. One of the most beautiful passages in the writings of
Lucretius, the Roman poet, captures the joy of a father bending down as his
children race each other to jump into his arms. One of the oldest pieces of
evidence of humans in America is the footprints of a parent, probably a
mother, walking in what is now White Sands National Park, carrying and
then setting down, carrying and then setting down, carrying and then setting
down, a young child.
This thing we’re doing, our wild, chaotic daily existence—the one filled
with joy and difficulty, love and labor—is a timeless one. The ancient world
was unfathomably different from our world today—those footprints in New
Mexico are intermixed with those of giant sloths and ancient camels and an
extinct species of mammoth—yet somehow that experience is one you’ve
had yourself countless times, at the park, walking back to the car after
dinner, at the beach on a vacation.
Parents have always worried about their kids. Parents have always played
games with their kids. Parents have always made plans for their kids.
Parents have always tried to be a model for their kids. Parents have always
tried to support and encourage their kids. Parents have always questioned
and doubted and wondered if they are doing enough, if they’re providing
enough, if the school is good enough, if the sport is safe enough, if the kid’s
future is secure enough. They were doing the same stuff you’re doing, and
it’s the same thing people are going to be doing fifty generations from now.
We are a part of something timeless and eternal, something very small
and very large at the same time. This should humble and inspire us. It
should give us purpose . . . and perspective.
And practical advice. Parenting is a topic that every philosophical and
religious tradition has spoken about. We can find lessons on how to control
our temper in front of our kids from Plato. Lessons on how to cultivate a
peaceful home for our kids from Marcus Aurelius. Lessons on how to not
spoil our kids from Seneca. Lessons on how to support our kids from Queen
Elizabeth II. Lessons on how to inspire our kids from Florence Nightingale.
Lessons on how to cultivate curiosity in our kids from Sandra Day
O’Connor. Lessons on how to cherish time with our kids from Jerry
Seinfeld. Lessons on how to balance our careers and our kids from Toni
Morrison. Lessons on how to believe in our kids from the life of
Muhammad Ali. Lessons from mothers who survived the Holocaust, fathers
who led the civil rights movement, sons who became war heroes, and
daughters who won Nobel Prizes  .  .  . the Stoics and the Buddhists, the
moderns and the ancients. We can learn from them all.
Like my previous book, The Daily Stoic, this book is built around
accessing that advice—one piece at a time, one day at a time. I recommend
that you begin on the page with the date you are presently holding this
book. (Don’t wait until January 1! Start today!) Wherever you begin, the
power of the book resides in your picking it up daily, consistently engaging
with the material—because even though the pages stay the same, your kids
will change, the world will change, and you too will change.
My book The Daily Stoic is now well into the second half of its first
decade. With more than a million copies in print in forty languages, there
are people who have read it every day for years. Even though the book is
the same as it was when I submitted it to the publisher in the fall of 2015, it
continues to connect with and be of service to people all over the world.
There’s a Stoic observation about how we never step into the same river
twice, for both we and the river are in a constant state of change.
This metaphor holds true for parenting too, and The Daily Dad was
designed around that very idea. It’s not a book for expecting parents or
parents with adult children; it’s a book for anyone at every stage in their
journey. Each day’s entry will strike the single parent of young twins
differently from the new empty nester, just as that same entry will strike
that same parent differently if they pick it back up the subsequent year. And
let us linger on that idea of “picking it back up” for a second, as it is a
critical theme in the philosophy of this book, as well as good and present
parenting.
Parenting, like the pursuit of wisdom, is a lifelong affair. No one is
expecting you to magically “get it.” In fact, that is the fundamental flaw of
far too many parenting books. You’re supposed to read some book, be it in
the scramble before they’re born, in the sleep-deprived toddler years, or in
some crisis when they’re older, and then be good? That’s not how it works.
On a minute-by-minute basis, your kids and life put you in situations you
could never have imagined on your own (and that none of the books seem
to anticipate). So while there is no sudden transformation in parenting, there
is still a process, a working at it, that you must take up. That’s what this
book—one page per day—is built around. Not a one-time thing but a
morning or an evening ritual, a checking in, a continual process.
We will fall short. We will lose our tempers, get distracted, prioritize the
wrong things, even hurt ourselves and the people we love in the process.
What then? Just as with the pages of this book, we must pick back up where
we left off. We must accept the fact that we are flawed humans while doing
our best to learn from our errors and to not make the same mistakes
twice . . . or any more times than we already have.
Dust yourself off. Recommit. Do better.
That journey—The Daily Dad as a book and as an idea—is, of course,
not just for men. Our daily email, which has been free at dailydad.com, is
received by thousands of women each morning. It’s called The Daily Dad
because I happen to be a father—of two boys—and that’s about all you
need to read into the name.
Whether your kids are old or not yet born, whether you’re a stepparent, a
coparent, an adoptive parent, gay or straight, whatever gender, this book is
about the journey to become the parent you’re capable of being, that your
children deserve you to be . . . that the world needs you to be. It is not a
short journey either—from birth to legal adulthood, as culture sometimes
defines it. No, being a great parent begins long before that and ends, well,
never. For even after we leave this life, our children will carry with them,
good and bad, the lessons we taught them by word and deed.
Raising children—or, as I heard a parent once correct an interviewer,
raising adults, since that’s the goal—is the hardest thing you will ever do. It
will also be the most rewarding and important thing you ever do.
That’s what this book—and the hard-won wisdom of generations past—is
about.
You are a parent. You are every parent who has ever lived or will ever
live.
We are in this together.
Now let’s go do our best, together.
JANUARY
TEACH BY EXAMPLE
(THE ONLY METHOD THAT WORKS)
January 1
A Little Fellow Follows You
In 1939, nine years before John Wooden would be hired to coach the
UCLA men’s basketball team, a friend sent him a picture with a poem on it
to celebrate the birth of Wooden’s first child. The picture is a man on a
beach whose son is running behind him, playing in his footsteps in the sand.
Wooden hung the picture in his home so he might see it every day. The
poem, which he memorized and liked to give as a gift, went as follows:
A careful man I want to be—
a little fellow follows me.
I do not dare to go astray,
for fear he’ll go the self-same way.
I cannot once escape his eyes.
Whatever he sees me do he tries.
Like me he says he’s going to be—
that little chap who follows me . . .
You don’t have to memorize these words as Wooden did, but you better
internalize their message. Your children follow behind you. They see
everything you do. If you go astray, so too will they.
January 2
Never Let Them See You Act Like This
I think of myself as a philosopher only in the sense of being able to set an
example.
—FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE
There is a story in Seneca’s famous essay “On Anger” about a boy who at
a very young age went to live in the house of Plato to study under the
famous philosopher. Returning home to visit his parents, the boy witnessed
his father lose his temper and yell at someone. Surprised by this violent
outburst, and with the simple innocence that children are capable of, the
boy said, “I never saw anyone at Plato’s house act like that.”
However we conduct ourselves in front of our children—particularly at
home, in private—they will come to see as normal. If we are rude or unkind
to our spouse, they will assume that is an appropriate way to treat people
they love. If we are anxious and overly worried, they will come to think that
the world is a scary place that must be feared. If we behave unethically or
cynically, they too will begin to cheat and lie.
January 3
Their Faults Are Your Faults
Don’t worry that children never listen to you; worry that they are always
watching you.
—ROBERT FULGHUM
Your kids can drive you nuts. The way they can push your buttons. The
way they can ask an interminable number of questions. The way they can
mimic you.
“I love him very dearly I guess because of his faults which are my
faults,” the novelist John Steinbeck writes of his son. “I know where his
pains and his panics come from.”
Our kids have our virtues and our vices. That’s what makes this whole
crazy parenting thing such a wonderful opportunity. Because we are here to
help them become the best possible versions of themselves. One of the
ways we do that is to help them become like us in all the good ways. But
one of the other ways is to prevent them from becoming too much like us in
all the bad ways.
It can be an incredibly difficult balancing act if we aren’t honest or self-
possessed, if we let our egos get in the way. We can’t let that happen. This
is our chance, our time! To help them. To bolster them. To help them
overcome flaws that maybe we never quite got over ourselves. To seize this
second chance—to give what we didn’t get.
More than that, it’s a chance to understand.
January 4
Show Them How to Keep Their Cool
In 1952, Margaret Thatcher’s father was driven out of office when a rival
political party won a majority in the election. He was upset. He was hurt.
And he could have allowed those emotions to drive how he reacted. But he
didn’t.
Instead, Thatcher’s father made a statement of incredible restraint and
dignity: “It is now almost nine years since I took up these robes in honor,
and now I trust in honor they are laid down.” He added later, “Although I
have toppled over I have fallen on my feet. My own feeling is that I was
content to be in and I am content to be out.”
We could say that what he was doing was showing his daughter how to
lose with grace. But it was much more than that. He was showing her that
external circumstances don’t define us, only how we respond to them. He
was showing her how to bear adversity and how to never surrender your
poise or self-control. These would all be lessons that Thatcher would use
throughout her tumultuous life as a public servant, a prime minister, and a
mother.
Your kids will need them too. So show them. Show by example, not just
with words. Show them, when you’ve been screwed over and it really hurts,
that still your personal code of conduct matters more. Because it does.
Because it will.
January 5
Which Will It Be?
In his Broadway show, Bruce Springsteen explained the choice presented
to all parents:
We are ghosts or we are ancestors in our children’s lives. We
either lay our mistakes, our burdens upon them, and we haunt
them, or we assist them in laying those old burdens down, and we
free them from the chain of our own flawed behavior. And as
ancestors, we walk alongside of them, and we assist them in
finding their own way and some transcendence.
Will you be a ghost or an ancestor to your children? Will you haunt them
or guide them? Will you curse them or inspire them?
Of course, we all know which of those two we want to be, just as Bruce’s
flawed father surely did. But then our demons, our issues, the ghosts of our
own parents, get in the way.
That’s why we go to therapy and read good books. That’s why we stay up
at night before bed talking to our spouse about how hard this parenting
thing is, to exorcise those demons by bringing them into the light. It’s why,
wordlessly, when we hold our kids, we promise ourselves to do better, to try
harder, to not repeat the mistakes we endured growing up.
This isn’t going to be easy. We’re not going to be perfect. But we’re
going to keep trying. We’re going to be an ancestor—someone who guides
them and inspires them. We’re not going to haunt their future selves like a
ghost.
January 6
Hang Their Pictures on Your Wall
He could not have known what the future would hold. He could not have
known how he and his country would soon be tested. But in 2019,
Volodymyr Zelenskyy gave a twenty-minute presidential inaugural address
to the people of Ukraine that foreshadowed how he would respond.
Despite being one of his country’s greatest success stories, making a
fortune in the entertainment business and then holding its highest office,
Zelenskyy asked not to be celebrated or held up as a model. “I really do not
want my pictures in your offices, for the president is not an icon, an idol, or
a portrait,” he said. “Hang your kids’ photos instead, and look at them each
time you are making a decision.”
Then, in February 2022, in an act of brutal illegality and avarice, Russia
invaded Ukraine. Zelenskyy stood and fought, refusing opportunities to be
rescued. What could be motivating him? His own advice. He has two
children, ages eighteen and ten, whom he fights for. The Ukrainian military
and its citizen-soldiers were similarly motivated—fighting valiantly
alongside him against incredible odds for the chance that their children
might live in freedom and live proudly, knowing that when it counted, their
parents were prepared to sacrifice everything on their behalf.
Each of us should be inspired and humbled by this example. But as
Zelenskyy said, we don’t need to put pictures of heroes on our wall. Instead,
we can hang up pictures of our children and strive to make them proud, and
this should inspire and fortify us when we have to make tough decisions for
their future, for their safety, for their freedom.
It is our kids who compel us to do the right thing . . . because they are
always watching.
January 7
They Learn from Home
It is constantly reiterated that education begins in the home, but what is often
forgotten is that morality begins in the home also.
—LOUIS L’AMOUR
You tell them to be good. To be honest. To follow the law. To care about
other people. That safety comes first.
You say these things, but what do you do?
You can’t say that you care about other people and then speed through
stop signs because you’re late. You can’t tell your kids that honesty is
important and then lie to get out of the ticket. What’s worth more to you,
avoiding a fine or living your values? That’s what you have to ask yourself
in every situation, particularly the ones where your kids are watching. Is
getting what you want worth teaching the wrong lesson and undermining
the values you are trying to instill?
Those kids buckled in behind you—they are absorbing your example and
assimilating the lessons that will shape them in the smallest and biggest of
ways. From the kind of driver they are going to be to the kind of person
they are going to be. They are watching you as you go through the world.
Right now. They’re watching you break traffic laws, break promises. They
hear you when you lie. They feel it when your actions don’t match your
words.
Kids learn from home. They learn in the car. They learn from Mom and
Dad. You set the standard, so be the standard.
January 8
How Are You Embodying Your Values?
On April 1, 1933, shortly after coming to power in Germany, the Nazis
held a boycott of all Jewish businesses. It was the first small persecution of
many to come. But too many mothers and fathers who had talked to their
kids about doing the right thing simply went along with it.
Not everyone, of course. Dietrich Bonhoeffer’s ninety-nine-year-old
grandmother, for instance. On that day, she was out shopping and she
refused to be told whose businesses she could support. She ignored or
dodged the Nazi troops stationed in front of stores and shopped wherever
she liked. Their grandmother “marching past Nazi gorillas” came to be seen
in the Bonhoeffer family as “an embodiment of the values they sought to
live by.”
That embodiment wasn’t lost on Dietrich, who ten years later would lose
his life plotting to assassinate Hitler. Even though he was a pastor, even
though he had plenty of opportunities to escape Germany and live in peace
and freedom in London or America, he stayed. His grandmother’s example
guided him, showed him how to live by his values.
Let the same be true for you and your children, whatever the future holds,
big or small.
January 9
Protect This Great Invention
The author, educator, and cultural critic Neil Postman points out in The
Disappearance of Childhood that childhood is a social construct. Genetic
expression makes no distinction between who is a child and who isn’t.
Children, as we understand them, have existed for less than four hundred
years. “The idea of childhood is one of the great inventions of the
Renaissance,” he writes, because it allowed children to develop, to learn, to
have a safe space to play and explore and discover themselves.
Like any invention, childhood can disappear. How? With the
disappearance of adulthood. Childhood, as both a social structure and a
psychological condition, works when things like maturity, responsibility,
literacy, and critical thinking mark an adult. But when things like long-form
writing and reading decline, the gap between child and adult shrinks; the
line between them blurs and then dissolves.
As parents, we have to protect this great invention. We have to increase
the gap between childhood and adulthood. Let them be kids . . . but also
make sure that you are being an adult. Be a leader. Be responsible. Be an
example, a model they have to strive toward. Let them see you with a book
they can’t yet comprehend. Let them be around adult conversations they
can’t quite understand. Let them see you working and sweating and
providing.
Let them see an adult—so they have something not just to look up to but
to look forward to as well.
January 10
Your Living Is the Teaching
Example is not the main thing in influencing others. It is the only thing.
—ALBERT SCHWEITZER
Socrates’s students said of their teacher that for all the genius he
possessed, Plato and Aristotle and all the other sages who learned from him
“derived more benefit from [his] character than [his] words.” So it was for
Zeno and Cleanthes, the two earliest Stoic philosophers. “Cleanthes could
not have been the express image of Zeno,” Seneca wrote, “if he had merely
heard his lectures; he shared in his life, saw into his hidden purposes, and
watched him to see whether he lived according to his own rules.”
Is there a better description—a better bar to set—for a parent than this? If
you want to teach your kids, it’s not going to be with words. It’s not going
to be with lectures. It’s going to be through showing them that you live
according to the rules you set and the values you are trying to tell them are
important.
January 11
We Can Be That Gift
Marcus Aurelius’s father died when he was young. But then this young
boy who was cursed by tragedy received a great gift. A gift that all children
who have received it know to be one of the most incredible things in the
world: a loving stepfather.
Ernest Renan wrote that, more than his teachers and tutors, “Marcus had
a single master whom he revered above them all, and that was Antoninus.”
All his adult life, Marcus strived to be a disciple of his adoptive stepfather.
While he lived, Marcus saw him, Renan said, as “the most beautiful model
of a perfect life.”
What were the things that Marcus learned from Antoninus? He learned
the importance of compassion, hard work, persistence, altruism, self-
reliance, cheerfulness; keeping an open mind and listening to anyone who
could contribute; taking responsibility and blame, and putting other people
at ease; yielding the floor to experts and heeding their advice; knowing
when to push something or someone and when to back off; being indifferent
to superficial honors and treating people as they deserved to be treated.
It’s quite a list, isn’t it? These lessons impacted Marcus so deeply, he
remembered them far into adulthood and recorded them for his own
reference in what would become Meditations. What made the lessons so
powerful was that they were embodied in Antoninus’s actions rather than
written on some tablet or scroll.
There is no better way to learn than from a role model. There is no better
way to judge our progress than in constant company with the person we
would most like to be one day.
January 12
Don’t Talk About It. Be About It.
Tim Duncan is likely the greatest power forward in the history of the
NBA. Five titles. Three NBA Finals MVPs. Fifteen All-Star appearances.
Fifteen All-NBA Team selections. Fifteen NBA All-Defensive Team
selections. The most devastating turnaround jumper off the glass that
basketball has ever seen. And he did it with a selflessness and poise that are
almost unmatched.
Almost is the operative word, of course, because Duncan was helped
along on this journey to greatness by his predecessor and teammate David
Robinson. How did these two superstars connect? How did one mentor the
other? In his NBA Hall of Fame induction speech, Duncan explained:
People always ask, “What did he tell you? What did he show
you?” I don’t remember one thing we sat down and talked about
specifically. But what he did was he was a consummate pro, he
was an incredible father, he was an incredible person, and he
showed me how to be a good teammate, a great person to the
community, all those things. Not by sitting there and telling me
how to do it, but by being that.
We’re better off embodying our philosophy rather than talking about it.
As the Stoics said, it’s a waste of time to speculate or argue about what
makes a good man, a good athlete, a good teammate. Our job, they said, is
to be one. This is how it goes, in sports, in life, and for parents. Sure, we
can talk all we want. We can have great conversations. But what matters is
what we do, who we are, how we act.
January 13
Here’s How to Have Lasting Impact
To be in your children’s memories tomorrow, you have to be in their lives today.
—BARBARA JOHNSON
Whether you know it or not, whether you knew them or not, your
grandparents have had a significant impact on your life. They did that
through the values they instilled in their children—your parents. And now
you’re passing many of those lessons on to your own kids.
That’s one person having an impact on three generations. When you
think about it like that, it’s not an exaggeration to say that your
grandparents quite literally changed the world. And they did it in the
smallest of ways—with just a few conversations, with how they went to
work every day, with the books they read in the evening and the manners
they displayed at dinner. They did it in the conversations they had when
their kids made mistakes. They did it in how they treated their neighbors
and mowed their lawns and plowed their driveways.
There are lots of things we can do to change the world. We should try to
do all of them. But we have to know—and we can never forget—how much
impact we can have on the world right here at home. Through our children,
their children, and their children’s children, we have profound
multigenerational legacy.
That’s an incredible power. Don’t neglect it.
January 14
Where Do They Learn to Judge?
I have a two-year-old son. Know what he hates? Naps. End of list.
—DENIS LEARY
We wonder where our kids learn to judge or, worse, where they learn to
be biased or to think less of this group or that one. There is only one
answer: they learn it from us.
It was a comment under your breath about your brother’s spending
habits. It was a joke about a celebrity’s weight. It was a complaint about the
way your neighbor parks in their driveway. It was the conversation between
you and your spouse over dinner about what’s wrong with the other side,
with them.
You didn’t mean anything by it. You don’t really care. But your kids
heard it. And they can read only your lips, not your mind.
We want kids who are open-minded, who give people the benefit of the
doubt. But are you showing yours what this looks like day to day? Sure,
you’re not a bigot, but are you always kind? You would never say
something cruel to someone’s face, so why are you saying it behind their
back? Especially when your kids can hear you.
The world needs less judgment, less bullying, fewer opinions, period.
Can you start this trend at home? Can you teach your kids what that looks
like, instead of letting the same old rumor mill spin round and round,
grinding their goodness to dust?
January 15
If You Want Your Kids to Respect You
You will earn the respect of all men if you begin by earning the respect of
yourself.
—MUSONIUS RUFUS
Every parent wants to be listened to. We want our advice to be taken
seriously. We want to be looked up to. Most of all, we want to be respected.
Well, if you want your kids to respect you, be worthy of respect.
Just think about it for a second: Why would they respect advice that you
don’t live by? Why would they admire you when you’re not living up to
your own potential? Why would they look up to you when you yourself are
dealing (poorly) with self-esteem issues, when you have accepted the lies of
impostor syndrome and allowed them to affect how you act as a parent?
Get your stuff straight. Be the parent you know you can be—be the
person you know you can be. The rest will follow. And if it doesn’t? Then
at least you’ll be strong enough to deal with whatever comes.
January 16
Don’t Let Your Kids Down
The Warrior Ethos . . . rests on the will and resolve [of Spartans] to defend their
children, their home soil and the values of their culture.
—STEVEN PRESSFIELD
If you don’t know the story of the three hundred Spartans at Thermopylae,
here’s what happened: The ancient Greek king Leonidas led some seven
thousand men, three hundred of whom were Spartan warriors, into a battle
against the invading army of Xerxes the Great and more than three hundred
thousand Persian soldiers. The Spartans held the front line for two days, but
on the third, they were finally overrun. Leonidas ordered the three hundred
Spartans to remain and fight, sacrificing himself and his men to allow
Greece to live and fight another day.
How did Leonidas choose the three hundred warriors he would lead out
to the Hot Gates to battle an overwhelming enemy? They were all “fathers
of living sons,” according to Plutarch. You might think it would have been
the opposite, that parents would be allowed to sit out a potential suicide
mission—but that’s not how it worked in Sparta. These warriors were
chosen because parents would never want to let their kids down. These
fathers would fight most bravely, most fiercely, not only to protect what
they had back at home but to protect the reputations of their family names,
which might be all their children had left if they were to fall in battle. To
abandon their comrades or behave in a cowardly way would be to risk great
shame and the possibility of letting down the family that so looked up to
them.
Our kids are whom we should want to impress. They’re the ones we
should never want to let down. They’re not only the ones we’re fighting for
but also the ones whose standards—whose natural admiration and love—we
should always be fighting to live up to.
January 17
You Can’t Be a Hypocrite
The only thing worse than a liar is a liar that’s also a hypocrite.
—TENNESSEE WILLIAMS
A few years ago, the Emmy-winning actor William H. Macy was asked
for the best piece of advice he had ever been given. “Never lie,” he
answered. “It’s the cheapest way to go. Lies cost you a lot and they’re never
worth what they cost.”
But as the authors of Unacceptable: Privilege, Deceit & the Making of
the College Admissions Scandal noted, precisely as Macy was giving this
interview, he and his wife, Felicity Huffman, were fabricating their
daughter’s SAT scores (without her knowledge, as it happens, and they
were planning to do the same for their youngest daughter). The worst part?
His daughter wanted to go to a theater school that didn’t even require high
SAT scores!
It was the cheapest way to go and yet not remotely worth the cost.
Macy’s wife would briefly go to jail for her role in the fraud scheme. His
daughter was crushed. Not only was the whole scandal a massive
embarrassment, but she also had to bear witness to the hypocrisy of her
parents, who had talked so much about being good people and then done
such a bad thing, the motivation for which was that they didn’t believe in
her!
No child deserves that. At the very least, they deserve parents who live
up to what they say. Give your kids that. Don’t be a hypocrite.
January 18
Teach Them to Be Particular
Kids are picky. They don’t like this. They don’t like that. They need those
to be exactly like them. But that can’t possibly be what John Lewis’s mother
meant to encourage when she repeated her motto to her kids as they grew
up. “Be particular,” she’d tell them.
What she meant, David Halberstam would write in his powerful book on
the civil rights movement, The Children, was, “be careful, and be
responsible for yourself, and always be well prepared.” This was a set of
standards that she tried to hold her kids to not only when they were little but
all their lives. In the 1990s, when her son John had become Congressman
John Lewis and was well into his fifties, she was still reminding them of her
motto. When John faced off in a series of political fights with Newt
Gingrich, Willie Mae Lewis called her son and said, “I want you to be
particular with that man.” Meaning again, as Halberstam writes, that, “he
was to be careful in his criticism of Gingrich; any attack had better be
factually accurate.”
Not picky but particular. Not peculiar but particular. Be exacting. Get
your facts straight. Do your job. Don’t let anyone or anything excuse you
from it. Do it well.
These are wonderful reminders to give our kids . . . but as always, it’s
much more important that they see us living these lessons. Show them the
difference between picky and particular, between factual and fatuous,
between compromise and compromising your standards.
Show them what responsibility looks like. Show them how to be careful
and how to always be prepared. Because someday you won’t be here, and
they will have kids of their own who will need to learn these very
particular lessons from them.
January 19
Where Did You See That?
Without a ruler to do it against, you can’t make crooked straight.
—SENECA
Your daughter gets mad, so she slams the door and screams. Your son
makes himself a snack and leaves the kitchen a disaster for someone else to
clean up. You hear them say something rude to a waiter. You see them write
something offensive on social media.
Before you get mad, before you condemn their actions, just take them
aside. Ask them, kindly and openly, a question that the bodybuilder Mark
Bell says he always asks his teenage kids: “Hey, when have you seen me do
that?”
This is a great question. Because it may well be that you have been
inadvertently modeling behavior you find repugnant in others. And while
that’s no excuse for bad behavior, it’s useful to know if we’ve been tacitly
condoning the wrong things to our kids. But if you haven’t, then they have
even less of an excuse.
January 20
Do the Things You Want Them to Do
You want your son to be strong and to be honest. You want your daughters
to be those things too. You want them to work hard, to help other people, to
be respectful to their parents and the people they meet on the street. You
want them to be clean and organized, to laugh and to be resilient.
Of course you want those things. Everyone does. The question is, how do
we raise good kids? The answer is staring you in the mirror.
The bestselling author and father of two Austin Kleon talks about how
this is the hardest part of parenting: You have to be the kind of human being
you want your children to be. You have to do the things you want your kids
to do. “I find this with parents all the time,” he said. “They want their kids
to do things that they don’t do themselves.” He wants his kids to be readers,
so he makes sure they see him reading. He wants them to explore different
hobbies and interests, so he makes sure they see him practicing an
instrument or tinkering in a sketchbook. He wants them to work hard and
find work they care about, so he makes sure they see him working in his
studio. He wants them to treat others with respect and kindness, so he
makes sure they see him giving their mother something he made for her.
Who you are forms who they will be. So be who you want them to be.
Do what you want them to do. It’s hard, but it’s the only way.
January 21
What Are They Learning from How You Carry Yourself?
That’s what we’re all doing. . . . We’re setting examples, . . . and our conduct will
have a great bearing on our youth, certainly, and our youth are our future.
—JOHN WOODEN
From his dad, Bruce Springsteen learned about shame, broken pride, and
struggling with demons that you can’t quite conquer. You can hear the pain
it caused Bruce in many of his songs.
As unlucky as Springsteen was to be dealt that hand, he was also
incredibly lucky to have a mother who set a very different example. In his
memoir, Born to Run, Bruce writes about visiting his mom at her job as a
legal secretary. “I am proud, she is proud,” he writes, recalling how it felt to
see her in her element, away from their house, doing her job. Bruce could
see himself in her, and it called him to be better. “We are handsome,
responsible members of this one-dog burg pulling our own individual
weight, doing what has to be done. We have a place here, a reason to open
our eyes at the break of day and breathe in a life that is steady and good.”
What are your kids learning from how you carry yourself? Are you
showing them, as Bruce’s dad did, how to be angry and bitter and lost? Or,
as Bruce’s mom did, are you showing them how to be brave and tough and
find their niche? Is your example calling them to be better or worse?
January 22
They Are Always Listening
Children have never been very good at listening to their elders, but they have
never failed to imitate them.
—JAMES BALDWIN
Have you ever heard your kids say something that just stops you cold?
One of those remarks that makes you instinctively do a double take? Like
that scene in A Christmas Story? Ralphie is holding a hubcap full of lug
nuts as his father changes a tire on a snowy night. Old Man Parker knocks
the hubcap and the lug nuts go flying. “Oh, fuuuuuuuuudge,” Ralphie says.
“Only I didn’t say fudge,” Ralphie’s voice-over explains. “I said the word,
the big one, the queen mother of dirty words, the F-dash-dash-dash word!”
Old Man Parker’s jaw drops and his eyes go wide. Where did that come
from? he must be thinking. Where did he hear that?
Of course, he knows. Ralphie heard it from his father, famous for the
“tapestry of obscenities” he could weave with his words when he was upset.
The little fellow was simply following in the old man’s profane footsteps.
The point is this: Kids are always watching, eyes, ears, and heart open.
They absorb everything. What will they hear? What is going to pour out of
you that will soak into them? That’s the question.
January 23
You Gotta Live Up to It
There are some very basic parenting laws that we all know and we all try
to get our kids to follow. They involve hard work, sportsmanship, effort,
manners, respect, and boundaries. You know the ones; they’re the basic
rules that every parent knows.
There are a million others that we believe are essential to growing up.
Some have become clichés, others are simple truisms, but they got that way
because we have found virtue in repeating them, day after day, child after
child, generation after generation. What we think less about is whether
we’re actually following those rules ourselves, whether we are abiding by
the laws we seek to enforce. As the billionaire Charles Koch once explained
of the main lesson he learned from his father’s very hands-on parenting: you
can’t lecture your kids on anything you don’t live up to.
You can’t tell your kids to respect others and then talk rudely to a
customer service representative on the phone. You can’t tell them that it’s
important to find and follow their passion and meanwhile work their entire
childhood at a job that pays well but makes you miserable. You can’t tell
them that family is important if your actions don’t show it.
You can’t lecture your kids. You have to live up to the lessons you want
them to learn.
January 24
When You Get Them to Listen . . .
E. H. Harriman was as rich as they come. A railroad baron. A captain of
industry. Everything his children could possibly want or need, he gave
them. Yet unlike some wealthy parents, he coupled this luxury with stern
maxims and advice. He wanted his kids to do something with their lives, to
make a difference in the world. He was fond of repeating, “Great wealth is
an obligation and responsibility. Money must work for the country.”
We all say things to our kids, just as our parents did to us. Little bits and
bobs of wisdom that we picked up places. We hope they hear us. We hope it
gets through.
And when it does? Oh, that is the best.
In 1901, when Harriman’s daughter made her debut in society, she was,
unlike her friends, appalled at the spectacle, at the parties people were
throwing for themselves. It seemed so wasteful and self-indulgent. So she
used her budget to found what would become the Junior League, a
volunteerism nonprofit that exists to this day to help the less fortunate. She
put her money to work not just for the country but for the world, and in
doing so improved countless lives.
We have to remember that as parents we are always planting seeds. A
comment here, a book we have them read there. A documentary we watch
together, an example we set, a person we introduce them to. When we get
them to listen? When they really hear us? Wonderful things can grow out of
that.
January 25
How to Deter Them
We must be what we wish our children to be. They will form their characters
from ours.
—JOHN S. C. ABBOTT
There are things we don’t want our kids to do. So we set up rules. We
create punishments. We supervise them closely. And this works—to a
degree—but it’s also exhausting. Meanwhile, we neglect the most powerful
deterrent and the most influential motivator: our own actions.
Plutarch tells us:
Fathers ought above all  .  .  . to make themselves a manifest
example to their children, so that the latter, by looking at their
fathers’ lives as at a mirror, may be deterred from disgraceful
deeds and words. For those who are themselves involved in the
same errors as those for which they rebuke their erring sons,
unwittingly accuse themselves in their sons’ names.
If you don’t want them to do something, if you want to deter them from
some negative influence or bad choice, let your actions be the guide. Let
your life both spur them and deter them. In this way, you can be their
inspiration in any moment.
January 26
Show Them What a Good Marriage Looks Like
Franklin Delano Roosevelt and Eleanor Roosevelt quite literally preserved
a future for their children by fighting for world peace. And yet it’s hard not
to judge them for the fact that their five children would be married an
astounding nineteen times!
One suspects that FDR bears the majority of the blame for this. He broke
his wife’s heart with his affairs. He could be imperious and condescending.
He had been spoiled by his own doting mother. Nor was Eleanor blameless.
She was so busy. She stuffed her resentments and her anger down. She often
pretended everything was perfect when, of course, it wasn’t. They were also
distant cousins, which was more normal at the time  .  .  . but still pretty
weird!
How could their kids know what a good marriage was like? They had
ringside seats to a complicated power marriage between two people who
often put just about everything else ahead of their happiness (or duties) as
spouses . . . and parents.
The point here is not to judge the Roosevelt marriage nor to insist that
you must stay in your current one. It’s to remind you: Your kids learn about
everything important from you. Including relationships. So what are you
teaching them with yours? What are they seeing that you might be blind to?
You have to show them what a good marriage looks like. You have to
embody what healthy connections and equal partnerships look like, because
the example you set will be their first and the most indelible.
January 27
You Can Be a Parent Anywhere
When we think teacher, we think classroom. When we think leader, we
think corner office or lectern or a general in front of their troops. But the
truth is that a teacher can do their job anywhere and in many forms, just as a
leader can.
As Plutarch said of Socrates:
[He] did not set up desks for his students, sit in a teacher’s chair,
or reserve a prearranged time for lecturing and walking with his
pupils. No, he practiced philosophy while joking around (when
the chance arose) and drinking and serving on military campaigns
and hanging around the marketplace with some of his students,
and finally, even while under arrest and drinking the hemlock. He
was the first to demonstrate that our lives are open to philosophy
at all times and in every aspect, while experiencing every
emotion, and in each and every activity.
As with teaching and leadership and philosophy, so too with parenting.
You can be a parent anywhere. You can be a parent every minute of every
day to anybody and everybody. You can be that parent in the same way that
Socrates taught—by example, by getting down to their level, by being open,
and by adapting to the situation at hand.
January 28
Let ’Em See You Work
A parent who set an example of loving their work might help their kids more
than an expensive house.
—PAUL GRAHAM
Our instinct is to find that “work-life balance” that so many people have
talked about. We aspire to succeed and achieve in each realm, but not if one
comes at the expense of the other. We aim instead to silo work, to not let
work intersect with our time with our kids.
The problem? Well, where are your kids supposed to learn the
importance of a work ethic? How are they supposed to know what a
hardworking dad looks like if they never actually get to see it? How are
they supposed to learn what work looks like at all?
That is also your job. To be the example. There is an old Latin
expression: A bove maiori discit arare minor. “The younger ox learns to
plow from the elder.” That’s because the oxen would be harnessed together.
Not only would the kid get to see their mom or dad do what they did, but
they’d be literally strapped into it together, to learn on the job.
Obviously good boundaries are important. Obviously you don’t want
your work life to overwhelm or interfere with your home life. But make
sure that striving for this balance doesn’t accidentally deprive your kids of
an important example that will serve them throughout their lives.
January 29
Make Your Household First
A critic once advocated that Sparta become a democracy. Lycurgus, its
great lawmaker, responded with the quip, “Make your own household a
democracy first.”
It’s easy to have opinions about what other people do. It’s less fun to hold
yourself to your own standards. You don’t like the ever-expanding national
debt? Okay  .  .  . but are your finances in great shape? You hate these
ballplayers who sign contracts and then demand trades, abandoning the
teams who made and paid them? But don’t you have your eye on a new
career opportunity? You don’t like celebrities making a mockery of
marriage . . . and how’s your own these days? You think these politicians
should grow a pair . . . but what truths are you speaking, and at what risk?
The point is: the place to apply your opinions about the way the world
should work is first and foremost in the small world where you actually
have some control. That is to say, at home. If you want to see a difference in
the world, then model that change and make a difference at home. You’ve
got plenty to work with, plenty to fix, plenty to improve. Start there.
Show your kids that change is possible. Show them why your opinions
matter, and how they can make theirs matter. Let them witness the real
impact that comes from practicing what one preaches. Help them benefit
from a focus on the practical instead of the theoretical, the actual instead of
the hypothetical.
Start now.
January 30
They Do Most of It
When the comedian Pete Holmes heard that Mitch Hurwitz, the creator of
Arrested Development, had two daughters who were both in their twenties,
he congratulated him. “You did it!” he said, acknowledging that his friend
had made it through the gauntlet, successfully raising two daughters to
adulthood.
But Hurwitz refused to take the compliment. “You know,” he joked,
“they did most of it.” Which is true! As we’ve said before, while being a
parent is incredibly important, we’re not nearly as important as we think we
are.
We do our best to set a good example. They do most of the work.
As hard as our job is, they have it way harder. Don’t you remember being
ten? Or fifteen? Or twenty? You don’t remember being a kid . . . probably
because you were so busy literally developing a brain. So yes, it’s amazing
to see what they’ve become and what they’ve done.
Just remember that they get the credit (and you get the blame).
January 31
You Don’t Stop Teaching Your Kids
Nell Painter was an accomplished adult. She was in her seventies. She was
a world-class historian. Yet even then, her mother was teaching her.
How did she have the courage to leave a promising academic career at
that age and go to art school? Well, her mother writing her own first book at
age sixty-five probably had something to do with it.
“It took me years to sense the bravery, the sturdy determination her
metamorphosis demanded, for she was tougher than I could see during her
lifetime,” she said. “I knew she delved deep to express herself with
unadorned honesty. Hard for a woman. Doubly hard for a black woman.
Triply hard for a black woman of a class and a generation.” And yet her
mother had done it. So when Nell reached her own golden years, she didn’t
find it strange to try something strange. She didn’t mind looking odd or out
of place. She didn’t mind doing something hard. Her book Old in Art
School: A Memoir of Starting Over is a testament to what her mother had
taught her implicitly and explicitly.
We should take from this two things: We never stop teaching our kids.
And though what we are doing right now may not be resonating with them,
it can teach them something in the future.
Keep doing what needs to be done. Embody what you want your kids to
be. Keep growing. Keep being the example they can follow. Keep teaching
them, implicitly and explicitly.
FEBRUARY
LOVE UNCONDITIONALLY
(THE ONLY THING THEY REALLY WANT)
February 1
There Is No Substitute for Your Love
In his beautiful and vulnerable memoir, Bruce Springsteen writes that his
father said fewer than a thousand words to him throughout his entire
childhood. Maybe “you’re not greeted with love and affection,” he writes,
because “you haven’t earned it.” So for decades, Bruce tried anything to
earn his father’s love.
In the 1980s, in his thirties, with a few Grammys to his name, Bruce
began to struggle with depression. He wasn’t exactly sure why. He’d
accomplished more than he dreamed. As an artist, he was beloved by
millions and was starting to be discussed in the same conversations as his
idols—Elvis, Dean, Dylan. As a son, a man, a human being, things couldn’t
have been more different. He felt completely alone.
In that loneliness, Bruce picked up the strange habit of driving through
his childhood neighborhood. After years of cruising old haunts, Bruce
writes, “I eventually got to wondering, ‘What the hell am I doing?’ ” He
went to see a psychiatrist, who didn’t need the background story to know
that Bruce was sensing that something had gone wrong and now he was
trying to fix it. “Well, you can’t,” the doctor said. You can’t go back. No kid
can turn conditional love into unconditional love, absence into presence.
Springsteen writes in the last verse of the song inspired by that trauma,
“My Father’s House,” about how his father’s house forever haunted him. It
stood like a beacon calling him in the night, he sings:
Calling and calling, so cold and alone
Shining ’cross this dark highway where our sins lie unatoned
It’s poignant, haunting, and heartbreaking. From the outside, it looked
like Bruce Springsteen had everything; on the inside, he felt like he had
nothing. It’s evidence of our power as parents. No amount of money or
celebrity or awards can substitute for your love. That’s all they want.
February 2
You Can’t Say These Words Enough
One word frees us of all the weight and pain in life. That word is Love.
—SOPHOCLES
Your kids shrug when you say it. It feels weird saying it in public—cliché,
lame, vulnerable. You don’t want to embarrass them. Or bother them. Or
interrupt. Plus, they know how you feel, right? You’ve said it a thousand
times before at home.
We have a million reasons not to say these words, but all of these reasons
are wrong because it’s impossible to say them enough:
I love you.
I’m proud of you.
It’s you I like.
You are special.
You are enough.
You’re the most important thing in the world to me.
At the end of your life, do you think, for one second, that you will kick
yourself for saying any of those words too much? Or is it more likely that
you’ll wish you’d said those things more? Because it would absolutely kill
you if you thought for one second that they might not know, that they might
not feel in their hearts, how much you loved them, how proud you were of
them, how nothing—not success, money, or lack of either—could change
what they meant to you from the moment they were born.
Life is full of risks. This is one gamble you don’t need to take. So say it.
Tell them how you feel. Tell them that you love them. Say it again and
again and again.
It’s impossible to do it too much . . . but you might as well try.
February 3
Love without End. Amen.
Parents “don’t just love their children every now and then.” As the verse
from the classic George Strait song goes,
It’s a love without end, amen.
It’s a love without end, amen.
Parental love is not something that is dispensed only when things are
going easily with your kids. When they listen. When they conform to your
expectations. Expressions of love are not just for when they succeed or
when everything is going well in your life or in your job.
Not every now and then but always. Without end. Unconditionally. Even
when they hit their siblings, when they lie about a test, when they don’t
want to eat their vegetables, when they want to quit something you paid a
lot of money for, when they’ve acted in a way contrary to the values you’ve
tried to instill in them.
Even if this kind of love isn’t something you got as a kid. Even if it
seems clouded when you’re struggling or difficult to express when you’re
pissed off. Even when they take you for granted and make things so hard on
you, you have to show them that you love them.
Now and then and every moment in between.
Love without end.
Amen.
February 4
Love Is About Service
Let us not love in word, neither in tongue; but in deed.
—JOHN 3:18
Being a parent is about getting them things. The cup of water they need
before bed. The new clothes for school. The hug after they fall down . . . or
fail.
Parenting is being there, literally. It’s about being of service, literally.
Driving them around. Tying their shoes. Coming over to do the dishes and
laundry after they’ve come home from the hospital with their own newborn.
Holding their hair back as they throw up from chemo treatments. It doesn’t
matter how old they are, or you are; that’s what we’re here for. That’s what
we do.
We ask them the question that Tom Hanks has described asking his own
children: “ ‘What do you need me to do?’ You offer up that to them. ‘I will
do anything I can possibly do in order to keep you safe.’ That’s it. Offer that
up and then just love them.”
That is love. It’s what your job is. You’re here to serve.
February 5
Make Sure They Know That They Are Plenty
Despite becoming Senate majority leader before the age of fifty, being
elected vice president and then president, and being the most formidable
power broker in Democratic politics for decades, Lyndon Johnson carried a
Texas-sized chip on his shoulder his entire life.
He grew up poor. His upbringing and his options landed him at
Southwest Texas State Teachers College. A perfectly fine school but not the
kind that a president attends—something he was convinced all of his
learned and sophisticated Ivy League colleagues were thinking as they
witnessed his ascendancy in American politics.
His insecurity began early. He never felt like he was good enough. From
a young age, his mother placed unfair expectations on him and made him
feel like he had to earn her love, that her pride in him was contingent on his
succeeding. She made him feel terrible when he failed—like when he
decided to stop playing the piano or dancing. “For days after I quit those
lessons,” he remembered, “she walked around the house pretending I was
dead. And then I had to watch her being especially warm and nice to my
father and sisters.”
It’s a sobering reminder to all parents: the feeling of deficiency is far
worse than any potential deprivation. So make sure your kids know that
they are enough, that they are plenty, that you have loved them from the
moment they were born. And make sure you remember that there is nothing
they have to do to earn this love. There’s nothing they must accomplish to
deserve tenderness and affection.
They are good enough. The talents, the interests, the goals they have, are
enough.
February 6
It Takes Discipline
In the 1960s, the young poet Diane di Prima was at one of those legendary
Beat parties that movies are made of. Everyone was there. There were drugs
and ideas and romances. Jack Kerouac was there, holding court. And yet di
Prima got up to leave and go home early.
Why? Because her babysitter was expecting her. All the other writers in
the room judged her, silently laughed at her, believers in that line that the
pram in the hall is the enemy of good art. Kerouac was not so silent about
his disdain. “Unless you forget about your babysitter,” he said to her in
front of everyone, “you’re never going to be a writer.”
Di Prima, a good parent, left anyway. As Julie Phillips writes in her
fascinating book about creatives and parenting, The Baby on the Fire
Escape, “She believed she wouldn’t have been a writer if she’d stayed. To
write and come home on time, she argued, required ‘the same discipline
throughout’: a practice of keeping her word.”
So often important and talented people use their work and their talent as
an excuse to neglect their obligations as parents. But di Prima was exactly
right to see them both as a matter of discipline and commitment. The idea
that anything (or anyone) is improved by neglecting one part of their life for
another is nonsense. But the opposite is true—by keeping your word to
yourself, to your children, you are strengthening an important muscle. By
being disciplined and protective of your personal life, you are being
protective and dedicated to your professional life.
Don’t let anyone tell you differently. Don’t let anyone judge you for that.
February 7
Wherever They Are, You Are Too
Buck Murphy was walking down the street in Whiteville, Tennessee, in
the late 1950s when a white man yelled at him, “How’s that jailbird son of
yours doing?” It was a delicate subject in the segregated South—Buck’s son
Curtis had been arrested for taking part in the Nashville sit-ins, which
would eventually galvanize the civil rights movement in America. “Where
is he?” the man taunted. “Is he still in the Nashville jail?”
Now, there were many reasons for the Murphys to be concerned about
their son’s activism. Of course, they too believed segregation was an evil
and they had suffered its many effects. But they also didn’t want anything
to happen to their boy. They feared reprisals at home. Maybe they even
worried that Curtis was trying to change too much too quickly. But in that
moment, challenged by a bully mocking his son, Buck demonstrated that
thing that all children want from their parents—true support. Buck said
firmly: “Wherever he is, I am too.”
Your kids are going to make choices that scare you. People are going to
doubt them. People are going to criticize them. Maybe you yourself doubt
the wisdom of their choices. And?
Where they are, you must be too.
Love your kids. Root for them. Support them. Fight for them and fight
with them. Be beside them and behind them. Wherever they are.
February 8
They Don’t Have to Make You Proud
Most people are proud, not of those things which arouse respect, but of those
which are unnecessary.
—LEO TOLSTOY
We say it casually. We mean well. “Make me proud out there, kiddo,” we
say as they trot out onto the baseball diamond. “Make your parents proud,”
we say as they head off to college. And when they do great stuff, we reward
them by letting them know that the mission has been accomplished.
They’ve made us proud.
We want this to motivate them. We use it, oftentimes unconsciously, to
hold them accountable. But is this the way it should go? Doesn’t it sort of
imply that they owe us something? That our support is not unconditional or
implicit? That if they don’t score a goal or make the dean’s list or land a
summer internship, we are therefore not proud?
Our kids don’t owe us anything. After all, they didn’t ask to be here. It is
we who are obligated to them, by virtue of our choice to bring them into
this world.
February 9
Here’s How to Tie Your Family Together
It is my pleasure that my children are free,” Abraham Lincoln once said,
“happy and unrestrained by parental tyranny.” Lincoln knew about parental
tyranny. His father used force. He was controlling. He meant well, Abraham
came to understand, but his father had few tools at his disposal, and the
ones he did have didn’t work. His kids were not fond of him, and they did
their best to get away from him as soon as they could.
That’s not what you want, is it? No, you want your kids to really listen, to
buy in. You want them around, you want them to come to you. You want
them to respect your rules and embody your values. You want them to do
what they’re supposed to do, the things that will make them successful.
So how do you get them to do those things?
Well, for most parents, the answer is to default to the easiest and most
primal form of leadership: force. It’s got a simple logic to it. You make
them do it—because I’m bigger than you, because I can take away the TV
remote, because I said so. And it seems like it works  .  .  . for a while.
Perhaps you remember how this worked from your own childhood.
Eventually, the strategy falls apart over time. In the end, it turns out to be
counterproductive.
Okay. Then listen to Lincoln. “Love is the chain whereby to bind a child
to its parent.”
February 10
When They Wander Back . . .
In one of the most famous parables in the Bible, Jesus tells of the Prodigal
Son. “There was once a wealthy man who had two sons,” Jesus says. “The
younger one said to him, ‘Father, give me my share of the estate now.’ ”
The boy took his share, sold it, and fled with the money. He traveled,
gambled, partied, drank, ate like a king, and within a week, he’d spent
everything. He found work on a farm feeding pigs. He couldn’t afford food,
so he ate what the pigs ate. Finally, it occurred to him that back home, even
his father’s servants ate in abundance. So he set out for home, intent on
confessing to his father, “I am no longer worthy to be called your son; treat
me as one of your hired workers.”
Before the boy could own up to what he had done, Jesus explains, his
father called to his servants, “Hurry! Bring the best robe and put it on him.
Put a ring on his finger and shoes on his feet. Then go and get the prize calf
and kill it, and let us celebrate with a feast! For this son of mine was dead,
but now he is alive; he was lost, but now he has been found.”
Your kids may never demand their share of the estate, but they will stray.
They will act out. They will try to establish their independence. They will
get themselves into trouble. As parents, we have to accept that, and accept
them all the same. We have to take them back. We have to give them what
they need. And when they wander back, we have to make sure they’re
always met not with reproach or “I told you so” but with affection and
understanding.
February 11
There’s a Reason You’re So Raw
There really are places in the heart you don’t even know exist until you love a
child.
—ANNE LAMOTT
In times that seem to bring out people’s worst, parents feel something
different. We’re raw. We’re vulnerable. We tear up when we hear about the
loss of a loved one. We feel it in our gut when we think about families
struggling to make ends meet. Those viral videos hit us differently. The
stepparents gifted adoption papers, the military parent surprising their
children with an unexpected visit home, families reunited at the border?
It’s like instant waterworks . . .
What is that?
You’re raw because having kids has opened you up. “I wasn’t
emotionally prepared for parenthood,” the comedian and author Michael
Ian Black writes, “after spending the thirty previous years in a cauterized
emotional state.” Parenthood forces you to engage the world in a more
active way. It forces you to engage with yourself and your own emotions in
an active way. Was it easier to go through the world closed off and cynical?
Is there something tribal and reassuring about focusing on yourself and your
problems and placing the blame for those things elsewhere, on those other
people?
Of course. But that’s less and less possible these days. This parenting
thing has changed you. It’s made you see that it’s all connected, that we’re
all connected. It’s made you better.
February 12
Love the Kid You Have
You are a very special person. There is only one like you in the whole world.
—MISTER ROGERS
The grade school teacher, bestselling author, and mom of two Jessica
Lahey has talked to hundreds of thousands of kids about the things they
want their parents to hear. “By far, the number one comment I get,” she
says, is some version of “ ‘I am not my brother,’ ‘I am not my sister,’ ‘I am
not my parents when they were my age,’ ‘I don’t know who my parents
think they are raising, but it’s not me,’ ‘My parents think they know who I
am, but it’s all their expectations of me and they have no idea who I
actually am.’ ”
Isn’t that heartbreaking? If there were a list of things you never wanted
your kids to think or feel, those responses—which Jessica says get emailed
to her almost every day—are probably right at the top of the list. No kid
should feel like their dad wants them to be someone else, to be something
different. No kid should feel that they are a disappointment. They should
know that they are special for who they are, that they make the world—and
your life—better just by being in it.
Your kids need to be seen. They need to be heard. They need to be loved.
They need to be known. For who they are, for what they choose to be. Not
for who or what you want them to become.
That’s all they really want from us. And they deserve to have it. So you
better give it to them. Starting today and for the rest of their lives.
February 13
You Can Always Give Them This
A person becomes happy to the same extent to which he or she gives happiness
to other people.
—JEREMY BENTHAM
You want to give them the world—or at least their own room and
whatever material things they need. You want nothing more than to make
them perfectly happy, but inevitably you’ll come up short. That’s the bad
news. The good news is that there are some things you can always give
them that, when others try to offer them to your kids, will never measure up
to yours. These are things that are always possible to give, always within
your reach: your attention, your understanding, and your love.
No matter what happens, no matter how rich or poor you are, no matter
what mistakes you make or they make, no matter how powerful or
powerless you are, you can always give them those things. In fact, you must
always give them. Because, in the end, those are more important than all the
other things you can and will do for them. Love and understanding,
especially, are the only things that truly matter, because they last even
beyond your death. Their impact is going to be one of the primary forces
that shape the adult your child becomes.
And if you think about it, the only thing they’ll truly (and rightfully)
resent you for, all else being equal, is if you know these things are true and
still you fail to provide them.
February 14
The Greatest Thing You Can Do
In The Second Mountain, David Brooks relates a conversation he had with
an academic friend. “I don’t really know of many happy marriages,” the
friend said. “I know a lot of marriages where parents love their kids.”
In such a marriage, your son or daughter misses out on a powerful
example. “One of the greatest things a father can do for his children,”
Howard W. Hunter once said, “is to love their mother.” Our notion of what
a family is has expanded since he made that remark. We have single
families. We have divorced families. We have trans families. We have
blended families and coparenting families. We have gay families and even
poly families. To each their own.
But the truth of the sentiment doesn’t change—in fact, it only expands.
The best thing you can do for your kids is love the person who brought
them into this world. The best thing you can do for your kids is love the
person you are parenting them with. Even if you are no longer with that
person, or if that person has deeply hurt or even betrayed you, you must
love the person responsible for a good chunk of your kids’ DNA or identity.
You must love who your kids love—that’s how they’ll know that they are
loved.
February 15
This Is What They Most Want
Eleanor Roosevelt had a rough childhood. Her mother was always difficult
and judgmental, but she was still her mother, and Eleanor was devastated
when she died at age twenty-nine . . . and then devastated again just months
later when her father died. She was sent to live with her grandmother, a
woman who, it quickly became clear, was the source of Eleanor’s mother’s
emotional issues and judgmentalness.
It was a dreary, painful existence that didn’t change until Eleanor was
sent to school in London. There, at a special school for girls, she met her
teacher Marie Souvestre, who finally saw in Eleanor not a plain, shy girl but
someone special, with talent, with ambitions, with the ability to make a
difference in the world. “Attention and admiration were the things
throughout all my childhood that I most wanted,” Eleanor later reflected,
“because I was made to feel so conscious of the fact that nothing about me
would attract attention or would bring me admiration!”
Don’t we ourselves want attention and admiration? In our jobs? In our
communities? In our marriages? Why wouldn’t our kids want the same
things in their young, fragile lives? And who could it possibly be more
meaningful to come from than us?
It’s hard to be a kid. They’re overwhelmed. They doubt themselves. They
wonder where they fit in, whether they matter. It’s our job to help them with
this. To let them know that they are loved, that they are special, that they are
enough. To give them the attention and admiration they deserve.
February 16
Keep the Main Thing the Main Thing
Most of what we say and do is not essential. If you can eliminate it, you’ll have
more time, and more tranquility. Ask yourself at every moment, “Is this
necessary?”
—MARCUS AURELIUS
There’s a wonderful little expression: The main thing is to keep the main
thing the main thing.
Every family, every person, has a different main thing, of course. But if
we could generalize, the main thing for us parents is to raise well-adjusted,
self-reliant, decent, happy kids. The main thing is not college. The main
thing is not making partner at our law firm. The main thing is not to have a
clean house. The main thing is not to win some competition with other
parents. The main thing is not grades, it is not following in your footsteps, it
is not being captain of the football team or an expert cello player.
The main thing is for them to be healthy, to be prepared for life, to have
good values, to have a good sense of who they are and what they want to
spend their life doing. The main, main, main, main thing is to love them and
for them to feel loved.
February 17
Let Them Wonder If You Know
As a young boxer trying to make it on his own for the first time, future
heavyweight champion Floyd Patterson would find himself so hungry that
he had no choice but to head over to his mother’s house late at night.
“Don’t tell Mom we’re hungry,” he told the friend who was with him. “I
don’t want her to know I haven’t been able to manage on what I’ve been
making.” But no sooner had Floyd said hello than his mother was making
him a snack.
“Don’t bother, Mom,” he said, playing it cool. “We had a big meal
tonight at a restaurant and couldn’t take another bite.” Just a snack, his
mother insisted, before serving an enormous meal. “I kept wondering if my
mother knew that this wasn’t a social call,” Floyd would reflect years later
in his memoirs, that “I wasn’t eating just to be polite.”
Of course she knew! A parent always does! But she didn’t say a word.
She just did what she needed to do, caring not only about her son’s well-
being but also for his feelings and his pride.
When our kids need help, our only job is to provide it. To help, not
lecture. To be of service, never to humiliate. This is how you create the kind
of relationship Floyd and his mother had—the kind where your kids know
they can always come home for help at any time, day or night.
February 18
How to Convince Them
The ardor of the young should be curbed slowly, lest by wishing to oppose them
with sudden impediments we drive them to despair and perdition.
—GIOVANNI BOCCACCIO
In 1941, Mary Churchill accepted the marriage proposal of a young man
named Eric Duncannon. She was young and inexperienced. They barely
knew each other. A war raged around them. Duncannon was almost
certainly not the right fit for her. Naturally, her parents—the heads of a
political dynasty in a time of rigid aristocratic marriages—were concerned.
But as Erik Larson details in his book The Splendid and the Vile, instead
of condemning her daughter, Clementine Churchill simply asked her
daughter if she was certain it was the right choice. She didn’t disapprove
outright, but she did let her daughter know she had some doubts. Then,
understanding that no daughter wants to be told whom to marry by her
parents, Clementine searched for someone her daughter trusted and
respected whom she could ask to weigh in, independently and casually. She
landed on Averell Harriman, one of Churchill’s advisers, who was dating
Mary’s sister-in-law.
Harriman took the young, impulsive girl aside. “He said all the things I
should have told myself,” Mary later reflected. He told her that her whole
life was before her. And that she “should not accept the first person who
comes along. You have not met many people. To be stupid about one’s life
is a crime.”
All this began to sink in with Mary, who then, after a few weeks, decided
of her own volition to break off the engagement. It was her idea . . . but she
came to later understand how lucky she was that her parents had helped her
get there. “What would have happened had Mummie not intervened?” she
wrote. “Thank God for Mummie’s sense—understanding and love.”
Our kids are going to do stuff we disagree with, but very rarely—
especially as they get older—will we be able to convince them of this by
force or fiat. We have to be understanding. We have to be patient . . . maybe
even a little bit sneaky. We have to give them advice and the tools to make
sense of that advice, because ultimately they are the ones who have to
figure out the right decision for themselves. And we have to make sure they
know that no matter what they decide, we love them.
February 19
Assume the Best
You have known your kids since they were little. You’ve seen them do the
sweetest things in the entire world. You know who they are.
So here’s a question: When they screw up, when they fail a test, when
they crash their car, when they get in trouble, when they talk back to you,
why do you assume the worst? Why do you treat them with anger and
judgment? Why do you jump all over them with criticism or frustration or
suspicion?
You know they are good and decent. You know they generally do their
best. You know what they struggle with. You know their fears and
vulnerabilities and weaknesses. You know what they’ve been through (deep
down, you know one of the things they’ve been through is being raised by
you!).
So why isn’t that being reflected in your tone? In your assumptions?
Where is the kindness? Where is the good faith? Why aren’t you talking to
them like someone who believes in them, who is a fan of them? Where is
the patience? Where is the charity? Where is the demonstrable
unconditionalness that you purport to have for them?
Mm-hm. That’s right. Oh, and remember, all this could be said about
your interactions with your spouse too.
February 20
These Are the Richest Kids
Everyone remembers the “rich kids” growing up. Even rich kids remember
the other richer kids. We envied their ski trips, their huge houses, their
equally big vacation houses, their electronics, their clothes.
And yet how many of those kids, when we look at them now, as adults,
appear to have actually been quite poor?
At home they faced a poverty of attention. A deficit of happiness or
stability. Maybe their parents fought all the time. Maybe they worked
constantly. Maybe they played favorites and none were their kids.
As adults, we now realize that to be rich is not necessarily to be wealthy,
especially as “wealth” comes in many forms. This is really good news. All
of us have the ability to give our kids a rich life. We can measure wealth in
the time and attention they get from us. By whether they feel safe and
secure, whether their house feels like a home. Even if we only make
$30,000 a year.
You can make your kid the richest kid in the whole school without
spending a dollar.
February 21
Always Be Their Friend
The entrepreneur Ben Horowitz was coached for many years by the
legendary Bill Campbell—the so-called Trillion Dollar Coach for his work
with Larry Page, Steve Jobs, and Sheryl Sandberg. In a eulogy he wrote for
Campbell, Horowitz told the story of one of the toughest things he had gone
through as a dad and how Campbell helped him through it:
My oldest child Jules concluded he was transgender and was
going to change his gender by taking testosterone and having
surgery. It’s impossible to fully describe how one feels as a parent
in a situation like that, but mostly all I felt was worry—worry that
he wouldn’t be accepted, worry that his health would fail, worry
that the surgery would not go well, worry that he would be killed
by some intolerant group. I was so filled with worry that I could
barely function. . . . So, I decided to tell Bill. When I told him, I
could see the tears well up in his eyes and he said, “That’s going
to be really hard.” Then he immediately wanted to see Jules. And
Bill made sure that he embraced Jules and let him know that he
was not alone and would always have a friend in Bill. Bill
understood.
This wonderful public moment about a private struggle, shared in honor
of a personal mentor, speaks to the heart of what every child needs to hear
from their parents, no matter what they’re going through: There are going
to be things in your life that are very hard. But you’re not alone. I’ll always
be your friend.
February 22
Tell Them They Carry This Everywhere
In July 2008, the journalist David Carr saw his daughter Erin off to London
for her first real job out of college. Erin had struggled in the previous years.
She had the beginnings of a drinking problem. She didn’t always date the
best guys. But she never had to wonder if her father loved her deeply.
When Erin landed in London, a letter from her father was waiting in her
email inbox. It’s the kind of letter a great parent writes, the kind that in
David’s case—due to his tragic and unexpected death at age fifty-eight—
would guide his daughter long after he was not around. The letter opens:
Honey, we are so, so excited for you.
Please understand that you carry with you not only our love and
support, but our admiration and pride in your decision to bring your
ambitions roaring into the world.
Make sure your kids know that no matter what, they are loved, they are
supported, they are accepted, they are enough. Make sure they know that no
matter where they go, they carry your love and support and pride with them.
February 23
Teach Them Early Where Their Value Lies
Young people must be taught from childhood that it is not right to wear gold on
their bodies or to possess it, since they have their own personal gold intermixed
into their soul, hinting . . . at the virtue that is part of human nature and received
at birth.
—PLUTARCH
Mister Rogers ended every one of his programs with a message directly to
kids that became almost a proverb in its wisdom and timeless truth:
“You’ve made this day a special day by just your being you,” he would say.
“There’s no person in the whole world like you, and I like you just the way
you are.”
We must, as parents, teach our children where their value really lies. It’s
not in their accomplishments. It’s not in what they earn or how they look.
It’s not to be found in anything external at all. Their value—to us, to the
world—is inherent. It exists because they exist. Because there is no one on
the planet with their same combination of DNA and experiences and
circumstances. That’s what makes them special—what makes them rarer
than the rarest jewels and more precious than the most precious metals.
February 24
All They Want
It’s tough to know: What do your kids really need? What must a parent do?
What’s essential? What’s optional? There’s no easy answer, but in 2008
President Barack Obama came close to articulating one in a Father’s Day
speech about what our kids really need and want from us.
Our kids are pretty smart. They understand that life won’t always
be perfect, that sometimes the road gets rough, that even great
parents don’t get everything right. But more than anything, they
just want us to be a part of their lives. . . . In the end, that’s what
being a parent is all about—those precious moments with our
children that fill us with pride and excitement for their future; the
chances we have to set an example or offer a piece of advice; the
opportunities to just be there and show them that we love them.
That’s your job, above all others. To be a part of their life—a positive
part. They need you to be there. To give advice. To be a good example. To
understand them and to love them.
Everything else is extra.
February 25
Hit Them with One of These
Your kid is running upstairs and you stop them: “Hey, before you go . . .”
You’re watching TV and your daughter is walking into the other room:
“Hey, I need to tell you something  .  .  .” Your boys are wrestling in the
backyard and the door opens and you come out: “Hey, guys . . .”
They think you’re going to remind them about some piece of
schoolwork. Or criticize what they’re wearing. Or tell them to stop
roughhousing.
No, you’re going to hit them with those words we can’t say often enough:
I love you.
That it catches our kids by surprise when we tell them we love them?
That we only want to put our feelings about them out there in the open, just
so they know, and they’re confused by it? That’s our fault, not theirs. It says
something about us, not them. And it’s something we, not they, have to fix.
February 26
This Is What You’ll Wish
Johnny Gunther was the pride and joy of two loving parents—a brilliant
young boy, fun and funny, headed for Harvard. And then, suddenly, there
was a diagnosis, then a fifteen-month battle with a brain tumor, and
ultimately a life that ended too soon.
At the end of Death Be Not Proud, the moving memoir by John Gunther
about his son Johnny’s short life, John’s wife, Frances, reflects on the loss
of her son. What is left, she asks, what does a person think and feel, looking
back on the all-too-brief time they had with their child?
“I wish we had loved Johnny more.”
That was it. That was what she kept coming back to. It’s not that they
didn’t love him—no one can read the Gunthers’ memoir and not be struck
by what a wonderful family they were. It’s that, when everything is stripped
away, all Frances could think of were the opportunities she could have
seized to appreciate him, and their time, more.
Let us hope that we never have to experience such a loss. No parent
should ever have to bury a child. But still, let’s try to think about the end of
our own time here on Earth. What will we think then? When we are
reflecting on our lives, what will we wish for? We’ll wish we had loved
them more. Even if we told them a thousand times in a thousand ways every
single day, we’ll think about how woefully short we came up in expressing
just how much our kids mean to us.
So let us try, right now, while we still can, to love them more.
February 27
Give Them This . . . While You Can
Future love does not exist. Love is a present activity only.
—LEO TOLSTOY
The poet William Stafford had some beautiful, thoughtful insights about
parenting. But his final insight was his best.
When Stafford fell dead of a heart attack at age seventy-nine, his wife
and children found on his desk a piece of paper with a short phrase on it,
perhaps the very last words he wrote in a fifty-year career. It was simply
“And all my love . . .”
Now love was not a word that Stafford used much. It might not be one
that you’re comfortable using much either. But you should . . . while you
can . . . while you’re still here. And don’t just say it. Give it.
Your kids, your family, your loved ones . . . they deserve that. All your
love . . .
February 28
Love Is Not a Victory March
Life is warfare and a journey far from home.
—MARCUS AURELIUS
Leonard Cohen, who had two kids, said that love is not a victory march, it
is a cold and a broken hallelujah.
The point is not to discourage you about being a parent. You already
bought your ticket and now you’re on the ride. It’s just a reminder: if you
go around expecting this to be an unending series of Hallmark moments,
you’re fooling yourself and setting yourself up for disappointment. If you’re
comparing how you’re doing with what you see on television, you’re being
unfair to yourself.
This thing is hard. Really hard. There are dark moments. There are
moments when you’re convinced you have no idea what you’re doing and
you think you’re the absolute worst. There are moments when you’ll be told
you are in fact the worst. But you have to keep going. You can’t give up.
You can’t despair.
They’re counting on you.
February 29
Take the Second Chances When You Get Them
You didn’t exactly jump out of bed with joy when your daughter came
rushing in at 5:00 a.m. to play. You didn’t give your teenage son much of an
opportunity to explain himself about his grades. You were distracted at
dinner, checking your phone constantly.
There’s no way around it. You screwed up. You weren’t your best.
No way to change that. But the one thing about parenting is that it gives
you second chances. It gives you a lot of leap days. Kids forget. They need
you for something else. There are lots of tough conversations. Dinner
happens every night.
While you cannot undo what has been done, you can choose to take these
second chances as they come. You can will yourself to play, even though
you’re exhausted. You can stop yourself before getting upset this time,
reminding yourself that you love the boy and that he’s still figuring things
out. You can put the phone in a drawer and actually be there for the family
meal.
We don’t get to do this forever. Tomorrow is never guaranteed. Today is a
gift, a fluke (especially on a leap year). That’s why each interaction we have
with our kids matters, why we can’t take it for granted. Still, we’re not
going to get it right every time. So when we’re lucky enough to get another
go? We better take advantage of it. We better try harder. We better show up.
MARCH
PUT YOUR FAMILY FIRST
(WORK, FAMILY, SCENE: PICK TWO)
March 1
You Can Pick Only Two
There isn’t time enough, my friends— / Though dawn begins, yet midnight ends
— / To find the time to have love, work, and friends.
—KENNETH KOCH
The prolific artist and father of two Austin Kleon was asked how he makes
time for it all. “I don’t,” he said. “The artist’s life is about trade-offs.” And
then he added a little rule that we should all keep with us always:
Work, family, scene. Pick two.
You can party it up and hang on to a relationship, but you won’t have
much time left for work.
You can grind away at your craft, be the toast of the scene, but what will
that leave for your family?
If you’re as committed to the work as you are to a happy home, you will
have no room for anything else.
It’d be wonderful if you could have the run of all these things all the
time . . . but you can’t. Being a parent is about making trade-offs, from the
very second our kids enter this world: it’s their needs versus our wants. At
first, it can be a shock to the system. But once we know what to say no to,
and we know why, we can say yes with comfort and confidence to the
things that matter. To the things that last.
March 2
Everything but This Is Temporary
When you are a narcissist mama takes the kids away from you . . . when you are
a narcissist, things start to just go away.
—SHAQUILLE O’NEAL
Charles de Gaulle helped save France. Then he ran it. Yet even at the
height of his power, he tried to always remind himself, “The presidency is
temporary, family is permanent.” Accordingly, he put up boundaries
between his personal and professional lives. He carved out private time. He
refused to neglect the children who depended on him so much, particularly
his mentally disabled daughter, Anne.
We can’t ever let ourselves forget: we may be very important to the
world, but to a small group of people to whom we are related, we are the
whole world. Nothing matters more than family, and nothing is more
permanent . . . until it isn’t. You can lose family. You can break your family.
You can drive your family away. And then it is their loss that becomes
permanent.
By all means, pursue your success. Realize your ambition. Just make sure
it’s not coming at the expense of what actually matters.
March 3
You Are Not a Babysitter
The late ESPN broadcaster—and father of two girls—Stuart Scott, was
once sitting in a restaurant with some friends and their respective children.
It was one of those delightful, idyllic scenes. Everyone was having fun. The
kids were behaving. The dads were present. Everyone was bonding. All was
well.
Then a well-meaning mom walked by and, recognizing Scott, tried to pay
him a compliment for “babysitting the kids.” She did not realize how
insulting this was to Scott—and in fact to all fathers. Because dads don’t
babysit their kids.
Babysitting is something somebody else does for your children on your
behalf, usually for money. By definition, the babysitter is not the child’s
parent. These were Scott’s kids. He couldn’t babysit on his own behalf,
even if he wanted to. It’d be like calling a homeowner a security guard
every time you see them lock their front door.
Scott was doing his job. He was being a dad. No more, but certainly no
less. As his friend would observe after Scott’s tragic death from cancer, “We
didn’t see ourselves as an occasional parental figure who might take the
kids off mom’s hands for a couple hours.”
See what you do as important. Because it is.
March 4
You Have to Make Adjustments
Queen Elizabeth II’s father, King George VI, met with his prime minister,
Winston Churchill, every Tuesday at 5:30 p.m. So you might think that
when his daughter took over in 1952, she would have continued the
tradition. Elizabeth was, after all, a traditionalist.
But she didn’t. At that time, Queen Elizabeth had two young children,
and every parent knows that 5:30 p.m. is dinnertime, knocking on bedtime.
To avoid the painful question “Why isn’t Mummy going to play with us
tonight?” her biographer writes, Queen Elizabeth “moved the audience to
6:30, which allowed her to go to the nursery to join in their nightly bath and
tuck them into bed before discussing matters of state with Winston
Churchill.”
The point is: whatever your children’s ages, you have to be ready to
make adjustments. Whatever your job is, it can and must be adjusted around
what we all know is our most important job. If the queen can put off
Winston Churchill for an hour, you can reschedule that conference call.
Family comes first. Before business . . . even the business of state.
March 5
When Is Their Time?
Ruth Bader Ginsburg explained her parenting strategy while she was in
law school (at a time when women simply did not do such things) like this:
Our nanny came in at 8 o’clock and left at 4 o’clock. I used the
time in between classes to study, to read the next day’s
assignment, but 4 o’clock was Jane’s time. We went to the park,
played games, sang silly songs. When she went to sleep, I went
back to the books. I had to make the most of the time I had. I
couldn’t waste time.
Of course you’re busy. You have work. You have your spouse. You have
your kids. You have all the obligations of adulthood. All these things are
important. How do you fit it all in?
The truth is, if you’re winging it every day, you won’t get it all in.
Something will fall by the wayside, and too often, it’s the time with our kids
that is the first to go. Because we can turn on the TV. Because we can strap
them in the car seat and bring them along on errands. Because we can tell
them, “Sorry, kiddo. I’m busy right now.”
This is why it can be a good idea to have very specific, scheduled time.
So you can be sure that they have their time. Nonnegotiable time. Just as
you do with work or anything else that matters to you.
What does it say about us as parents if all we give them is the leftover
time? Nothing good. They are the priority. Remember that the next time you
put another new obligation on your calendar.
March 6
This Is What Putting Them First Looks Like
For his whole career, Archie Manning had been a company man for the
New Orleans Saints. He was great but the team was terrible. For years they
had lost. For years he had endured poor offensive lines, poor drafting, and
never even coming close to playoff contention.
So you’d think when he was traded to the Houston Oilers and then to the
Minnesota Vikings, it would have been a blessing. It could have breathed
new life into his career. He still had years left in him, and now he had a real
shot at being part of a winning team . . . finally! But instead, in 1984, he
retired.
Why? His son Eli. As Manning explained in the book My First Coach:
Inspiring Stories of NFL Quarterbacks and Their Dads:
I sensed that my relationship wasn’t quite the same with Eli that it
had been with Cooper and Peyton at that age. . . . I was gone and I
didn’t like it at all. I remember that was one of the real joys for
me when I retired: that I would be home, I would be around full-
time for Eli.
That’s what great parenting looks like, what true greatness—on and off
the field—looks like. Would anyone back then have noticed two more
seasons with the Vikings? Would anyone now have bothered to remember
them? Maybe. Maybe not. You know who definitely noticed? You know
who definitely remembers? Eli. And he benefited unquestionably and
immeasurably from his father’s choice. He has a happy family and two
Super Bowl victories to show for it.
What could it look like if you put your family first? If you really put
them ahead of everything else? You can’t be sure exactly until you do it, but
you can be certain that it will feel great.
March 7
How Are You Filling Their Bank?
Each day of our lives we make deposits into the memory banks of our children.
—CHARLES R. SWINDOLL
Think of your own childhood. What do you remember? Is it those big
moments? You know, the planned ones. The ones on the calendar. Is it
exclusively Christmas mornings? The annual spring break vacations? The
Fourth of July barbecue?
Or are your memories much more mundane?
What we remember about growing up are the little moments. We
remember sitting in the passenger seat next to Dad on a long drive. We
remember going for pizza after tennis practice. We remember waking up
from a nap and coming downstairs and watching a football game. We
remember that little piece of advice. We remember thinking they were
going to be mad at us for something and getting a hug instead.
Similarly, the wounds that we feel often come from other small moments.
The feeling of being ignored. Getting yelled at for leaving our shoes in the
living room. The time that Mom didn’t stand up for us. The unspoken
tension in the living room between our parents.
Today you’ll be making plenty of these small deposits in their memory
banks. How do you want that ledger to read?
March 8
Being Important Is Not an Excuse
I’ve built an office behind our house. Someday my daughter will look at it and
think  .  .  . “That’s where my dad worked to provide for us,” and feel a little
sentimental. What I never hope she thinks is, “That’s the place my dad loved
more than me.”
—DONALD MILLER
It would be wonderful if these quotes didn’t exist, but they do. They come
from the children of great men. From Albert Einstein’s son. From Nelson
Mandela’s daughter. From kids whose dads were presidents or kings or
rockstars or CEOs. They go something like this: “You were there for so
many people as part of your job, but you were never there for me” or “You
were the best in the world at everything you did . . . except for fatherhood.”
It’s heartbreaking. Obviously the world needed Nelson Mandela. It
needed Eleanor Roosevelt. It needed Steve Jobs. It needed Albert Einstein.
What they did was hard, and important. It required sacrifice. It came at the
expense of their families—it had to.
But did it have to come at such a high cost?
There is no job, no career, no amount of responsibility that justifies being
absent from the lives of your children. Being important, having a calling,
achieving success, is great. But being important doesn’t change what your
most important job is: being a parent. Being there for them. Becoming
world class at being Mom or Dad.
Because when your days in the spotlight are over, when your fame and
import have receded, you will still be a parent and your kids will still need
you for the things kids have always needed their parents for.
March 9
This Is the Only Success That Matters Now
Anytime you feel guilty about not meeting some sort of insane, unachievable
demand, ask yourself, “Does this help me improve my relationship with my
children? And does this help my community?”
—JESSICA GROSE
All of us, before we were parents, chased success in our own way. Some
of us wanted it more than others. Some of us got it. Some of us didn’t.
Then we had kids. And what did that change? Well, it certainly took up
more of our time and energy. It made financial security more important. It
made us grow up. But mostly what it did was utterly and irrevocably
change our definition of success. As Theodore Roosevelt explained:
There are many kinds of success in life worth having. It is
exceedingly interesting and attractive to be a successful
businessman, or railway man, or farmer, or a successful lawyer or
doctor; or a writer, or a President, or a ranchman, or the colonel of
a fighting regiment, or to kill grizzly bears and lions. But for
unflagging interest and enjoyment, a household of children, if
things go reasonably well, certainly makes all other forms of
success and achievement lose their importance by comparison.
We still want to be good at our jobs, of course. We want to win
championships or land big clients. We want recognition and we want the
thrill of the chase. But we know now—because we’ve felt it—how small
these things seem compared to a quiet evening at home. A Sunday in the
park. Breakfast full of laughter. Watching them on a stage or running from
the sidewalk into your arms.
This is the only success that matters now.
March 10
Welcome To Unavoidable Reality
When the columnist and author David Brooks’s son was born, a friend
sent him an email that just said, “Welcome to the world of unavoidable
reality.”
Every dad knows what that means. It captures being a parent perfectly.
The biggest change that comes from having a kid isn’t financial—it’s not
the sleep deprivation, it’s not even needing to take care of another person or
the stress it puts on your relationships. It’s that it rudely introduces you to
the unavoidable reality that you are no longer the center of your own world
—something you had been, despite what you thought, utterly ignorant of.
As an adult, you did what you wanted. Things operated on normal
timelines. You made decisions and commitments and that was it. The world
was logical and in your control. But now and for the rest of your life, reality
is different. What time are you going to get to the party? When your
daughter wakes up from her nap, that’s when. They’re sick with the flu?
You’re sick with the flu. They feel like having a tough morning or are
reeling from teenage hormones? Looks like you are too! Unavoidable
reality means that you’re not in control. It means you’re going to sit and
play in the sandbox for the next ninety minutes because God knows you’re
not going to risk a tantrum. Unavoidable reality is weekends of soccer
games and evenings of school plays and carpooling and school pickups. It
means you can’t just skip dinner or grab something on the go—life doesn’t
work that way anymore.
That’s who you are now. That is the unavoidable reality. And guess what?
It’s wonderful. Get used to it.
March 11
It’s About Being There . . . a Lot
Don’t you think maybe they are the same thing? Love and attention?
—GRETA GERWIG
How do you get through to your kids? How do you show them what’s
right? How can you make sure they know how much you care about them?
The answer is simple: you can be there. A lot. There is a joke that the
word love is actually spelled T-I-M-E. It’s true. Your kids won’t have to
wonder, they won’t need to ask—you, or your partner, or other people—
how you feel about them if you are constantly there to show them. If you
have prioritized your time with them over everything else. Being there also
alleviates the pressure to “find the words” in those trying moments, because
you’ve been having an ongoing, regular conversation with your kids the
whole time. The words are there.
But being a great parent is not just about those pivotal moments. It’s not
just providing for them or getting them into a great school so they can get
ahead in life. It is mainly, and mostly, the day-to-day T-I-M-E. It’s the
modeling, each day, of what being a good person looks like. It’s the
showing, each time you see them, that you care, that they’re important, that
they are loved.
It’s about being there. A lot.
March 12
They Must Come First
Queen Elizabeth II had just returned from a six-month trip abroad. Her
kids had been aboard the royal yacht for days, eagerly awaiting her return.
Did she have presents? Would she tell them wonderful stories? Would she
smother them with kisses?
As she stepped aboard, Prince Charles, the future King, ran to her.
Always a stickler for protocol, however, the queen politely greeted a group
of dignitaries first. “No, not you, dear,” she chided him, finishing her
business before embracing her family.
Even some sixty-five years after the fact, even if you have an important
job, even if you’re an avid rule follower, even if you don’t like Charles, it
still breaks your heart. Especially when we know that she knew better,
having moved her weekly meeting with the prime minister to be there for
her babies at dinnertime.
But now, after that much time apart, those were her first words to her six-
year-old son? What had changed? Couldn’t she see the awful symbolism?
Literally putting work before family? After having already put them on
pause for six months?
Your kids must come first. Not just in the very first months or years but
always. You must say to them, “Yes, you, dear,” and never ever the
opposite.
March 13
Don’t Let Them Steal from Your Family
A few weeks before his tragic death, Kobe Bryant got a note from a
reporter at ESPN. She was working on a story about a moment in Lakers
history and she wanted to feature Kobe in it. It’s one of those requests that
public figures get all the time. It’s part of their job—in fact, it’s one of the
things that attracted them to the job in the first place. To be in the news, to
have people want to hear their opinion, to grow their brand. Kobe replied:
“Can’t right now. My girls are keeping me busy. Hit me up in a couple of
weeks.”
Do you have the discipline to send a message like that? How strong are
you at putting your family first? How good are your defenses against the
endless requests, opportunities, impositions, and obligations that come with
your work in particular and with life in general? It’s so easy to let people
steal your time, to let them take you away from the thing that is keeping
you busy: your kids, your family.
Kobe Bryant, tragically, will not get any more time with his kids, and
they will not get any more time with him. Which is what makes that text he
sent such a powerful reminder—a final feat of performance left there to
inspire those of us continuing in the shadow of his death.
Put your family first. Put your kids first. Say that you’re too busy.
Politely decline. You have other priorities.
March 14
Do You Know Them?
It’s a story so bad it has to be true. The 2nd Earl of Leicester was walking
down the hallway of his enormous estate. A young nurse holding the hand
of a child passed him in the corridor. “Whose child is that?” he asked her.
Taken aback, it was all she could do to utter calmly, “Yours, my lord.”
Needless to say, the earl died unhappy and mostly alone.
Now, thankfully, most of us are not this aloof. No one would accept or
condone that kind of absentee parenting anymore—or even just the more
benign aristocratic hands-off style the British were known for. But still, it
begs the question: How well do you know your kids . . . really?
March 15
Their Needs Are So Modest
Your kids are not keeping score on your career. . . . They just want a parent who’s
emotionally present and supportive of them.
—BEN STILLER
David Letterman was the king of late night. His shows ran for thirty-three
seasons, making him the longest-serving late-night talk show host in the
history of American television. At its peak, he was making something like
$30 million a year, watched by an audience of many millions every week.
In 2014, Letterman announced that he was hanging it up. On the day he
made the decision, Letterman went to his young son (whom he’d had later
in life) with the news. “I’m quitting. I’m retiring,” he told Harry. “I won’t
be at work every day. My life is changing; our lives will change.”
“Will I still be able to watch the Cartoon Network?” his son asked. “I
think so. Let me check,” Letterman replied. There he was, walking away
from millions of dollars and one of the most coveted slots in all of
television, and his son’s main concern was whether he could still watch TV.
Kids will humble us like that. We think we’re so important. We think our
work is so important. In fact, that’s what we tell ourselves—that we work
those long hours to make the money to provide them a certain kind of life.
In fact, our kids’ needs are so humble. Mostly what they want is us. And
beyond that? They’re pretty content with snacks. The occasional video
game. A sprinkler to play in. Some magnet you picked up at the airport on
the way home from a business trip. A parent who doesn’t yell at them all
the time. They’re pretty easily impressed. Their needs are small.
March 16
It’s Not Possible without Struggle
At an event for female judges in the 1980s, during Sandra Day
O’Connor’s term as the first female Supreme Court justice, a law professor
asked, “How do you take care of your family and have a career?” O’Connor
answered: “Always put your family first.”
It was an inspiring answer, but all the trailblazing women in the room
understood it was not the full truth. As her biographer wrote, the women in
the audience suspected that the real answer to the question was “By
constant struggle,” by painful choice, and by trade-offs. We can’t be flip
about it; putting your family first ahead of your ambition is essential; but
it’s also tough. If it were easy, every parent would do it.
Indeed, later in life, O’Connor would talk about how “desperately hard”
it was to balance work and family. She would try to talk to her law clerks,
male and female, about this struggle. She didn’t dance around how hard
would it be. She shared what she had learned. And most important, in being
up front, she provided them, and now us, the relief of knowing: it’s not
possible without struggle.
March 17
You’ll Never Regret Playing with Your Kids
Even if you’ve just put on your work clothes. Even if you’re already late.
Even if the pool is freezing. Even if they’ve been getting in trouble lately or
been difficult to deal with. Even if you’ve got the weight of the world on
your shoulders. You will never regret choosing to stop whatever it is you
were doing, or were about to do, to play with your kids. You will never
regret jumping in the water with them, picking up the video game controller
with them, spending a few minutes with them, letting Saturday actually be a
Saturday with family.
You will always be glad you took the time. Because none of us know
how much of it we’re going to get. There is no message more important to
send than the one that says, “There is nothing more important to me than
you.” As busy as you are, as much as you’re dealing with, there has never
been a mind that was not improved or refreshed by temporarily entering the
world of a child.
But of course, you will regret letting too many of these opportunities pass
you by. In fact, you know that you already do . . . because you already have.
March 18
This Is the Real Dad Tax
One of the perks of parenting is the so-called Dad Tax—the bite of their
ice cream, the pieces of their Halloween candy, the biggest pork chop on the
serving dish. It’s your house and you are bigger, so you get to exact the iron
price from your kids anytime you want.
The basketball coach John Thompson, who grew up poor in Washington,
DC, recalls that his father always ate whatever he and his siblings left on
their plates. But as he got older, he realized that this was a different kind of
Dad Tax—one his father was paying, not collecting. “Now I realize the man
must have been hungry but sacrificed so we could have more than him,”
Thompson wrote in his memoirs. “Was I so selfish that I didn’t realize the
reason he chewed on that pork chop bone I left behind, why he sopped up
the gravy on my plate? My father was providing. He didn’t eat so we could
eat.”
Putting your family first isn’t just a matter of your schedule. The author
Simon Sinek famously wrote that “leaders eat last.” So should dads,
because the inherent, unquestionable responsibility that you assumed the
minute you brought a child into the world was that they come first. They get
the bulk of what’s available. They don’t get the biggest pork chop; they get
as many pork chops as they need. They get to experience the fun and the
sweetness of life. If there are any leftovers, even if it’s just the scraps, then
maybe you get a taste.
March 19
Don’t Do This to Them
When she was a young girl, Angela Merkel’s father was gone a lot. He
had to travel to see his congregation. He had meetings and church business
to attend to. Like all of us, he was busy. He had work responsibilities,
spiritual responsibilities, adult responsibilities.
It took a toll on his family. “The worst was when he said he would be
right back,” Merkel later reflected, “but then it took hours for him to
return.” Often she would find herself waiting for hours in the street,
expecting him home at any minute, always to be disappointed.
All of us do this in some form or another. “It’ll just be a minute,” we tell
them as we run an errand. “Let me finish this quick phone call,” we say,
shushing them over and over again while they beg to play with us outside.
“Dinner will be ready soon,” we say, knowing it will be much longer than
that. “I’ll be home before it gets dark, I promise,” we say, as if traffic could
not delay us. Or, like Merkel’s father, our trips and travels get extended and
we miss things . . . or keep them up waiting.
While none of us fully control our time or our schedule, we do control
how we communicate with our children—we control how we give our word
and how we keep it. And it’s essential that we take that seriously. Our kids
shouldn’t just be expected to deal with it. They should be communicated to
and informed with respect. They deserve an explanation for the things that
keep us away from them, that keep them away from the things that it is our
adult responsibility to provide. It’s a matter of duty, to be sure, but more
important, it’s a matter of trust.
March 20
They’re Going to Ask You Only So Many Times
Sometimes you will never know the value of a moment until it becomes a
memory.
—DR. SEUSS
They’re going to ask you only so many times: to get in the pool with them,
to sit next to them, to help with their homework, to talk about the problem
they’re having.
Not because you only get a certain number of summers and car rides and
moments with your kids—though that is true. They’re going to ask you only
so many times because at some point they’re going to get the message.
Dad is too busy; he isn’t any fun anymore. Mom judges; she isn’t
actually a good person to ask.
That message.
So you can’t defer the opportunity to answer till later. You can’t afford to
lose your temper because this is the nth time they’ve asked. You can’t give
anything less than your best, your most present, your most fun self. Because
this ask—in this moment—is it.
It’s your chance. You can’t waste it. You can’t send them the wrong
message. You have to seize it. You have to show them who you are.
March 21
If You Want Your Children to Turn Out Well
Seneca called wealth a “preferred indifferent.” It’s not good or bad but
nice to have. He was right. Money does make some things better. It’s
certainly better to have money than to not have it. But it’s a mistake to think
that money will magically create a wonderful childhood for your kids.
It’s not true that money will guarantee your kids a good life. It’s not true
that it will prevent them from feeling pain or loss. It’s not true that money is
even high on their list of needs.
What kids actually want is you. What kids actually need is you. As Dear
Abby quite brilliantly put it in a column back in the 1950s, “If you want
your children to turn out well, spend twice as much time with them, and
half as much money.”
You can’t pay someone to be there for your kids. You can’t pay someone
to do the job only you can do. Sure, money can make things easier; it can
buy childcare and tutors. But it will never be as important as what you can
provide by being hands on, by being a good example, by showing them you
care for them and value them.
The proof of this? Just think about how many great people turned out just
fine without much money at all.
March 22
They Are Your Work
When you love, you wish to do things for. You wish to sacrifice for. You wish to
serve.
—ERNEST HEMINGWAY
All of us are busy. We have conflicting responsibilities and a lot to
manage besides that. Still, we can’t ever forget what our first, real job is. As
the economist Bryan Caplan tells his children, all four of whom he now
homeschools, “You are not an interruption of my work. You are my work.”
Our job is to raise great kids. Or, more precisely, our job is to raise great
adults. The time we spend with our kids—whether it’s homeschooling or
watching a TV show on the couch—is not a distraction from our work. It is
the work. Really important work.
Who could really view their life as successful if they were famous but
their kids were struggling? Who would be truly happy accepting a Nobel
Prize knowing that they had failed as a parent? What good would a billion
dollars be if all the money in the world can’t convince your kids to come
home for the holidays?
That’s why kids can never “take away” from our careers or “hold us
back.” It’s not possible for them to interrupt our work . . . because they are
our work.
March 23
You Are the Exalted Creator
Whatever you have accomplished or hope to accomplish, there is
something you will never be able to top. As the Catholic activist—and
possible future saint—Dorothy Day wrote:
If I had written the greatest book, composed the greatest
symphony, painted the most beautiful painting or carved the most
exquisite figure, I could not have felt the more exalted creator
than I did when they placed my child in my arms. . . . No human
creature could receive or contain so vast a flood of love and joy as
I felt after the birth of my child. With this came the need to
worship, to adore.
That feeling, the one you felt the first day you held your children. The
feeling when they run into your arms and call you Daddy, or when they
come into your room to ask for advice, or when you sit across the table
from them and watch them eat. That feeling—the pride, the love, the
connection—this is the feeling to carry with you.
You made that. You are the exalted creator of that. Parent in a way that
proves it.
March 24
Give What You Didn’t Get
NFL wide receiver Marqise Lee didn’t play football in 2020. He could
have played for Bill Belichick, but he didn’t. Not because he was worn
down or afraid of the grind—as an athlete and a football player, he was in
the prime of his career.
No, he opted out of that season because, as it did for so many, COVID-19
disrupted everything. Sports, like business, involves travel and time at the
office, away from family. But with COVID-19 protocols, with limited
access to family and friends on the road, that NFL season was different. It
would have been too much time away for Lee, more than he was willing to
bear. As he told ESPN:
People who know my background and where I came from, and
things like that, I didn’t really have my pops in my life. I never
really had a real father figure besides coaches as I got older. This
is my opportunity to be there for my daughter. I was hoping she
could be there watching this season, but clearly she wasn’t going
to be able to do that. I felt like it was important to just spend this
year with her, and get back to it next year. Football is going to be
there at the end of the day.
Lee was putting his family first. He was doing something his father
didn’t do for him. He was drawing a line. He was deciding not to waste the
most precious thing we have with our children: time. Each of us must
decide the same.
March 25
Why Didn’t You Make Time for Me?
Not to be always ducking my responsibilities to the people around me because of
“pressing business.”
—MARCUS AURELIUS
I hope you are quite well,” a young Winston Churchill wrote to his always-
busy father from his boarding school in 1886. “You never came to see me
on Sunday when you were in Brighton.” It was not the only time he would
write such a thing to his father. “I cannot think why you did not come see
me, while you were in Brighton, I was very disappointed but I suppose you
were too busy.”
As Josh Ireland observes in the fascinating book Churchill and Son, it’s
not just the disappointment of the boy that registers all these years later but
also his sad attempts to rationalize his father’s selfishness.
We will not be perfect as parents. We will make mistakes. But we must
do our best to avoid inspiring that painful question: Why didn’t you make
time for me? Because there is no good answer for it. And the rationalizing
answer they come up with has the potential to mess with their minds and
redouble the damage of our absence.
Your kids don’t care that you’re president. They don’t care that this is the
busy sales season. They don’t care that your own parents were sick. They
don’t care that you were fighting over custody. They just care that you
weren’t there.
Time is not given. It is made. We have to make time. That’s our job. It’s
our biggest priority.
March 26
Here’s What You Mean to Them
Sean Lennon, the only son of John Lennon and Yoko Ono, had to grow up
without a father. Tragically, John Lennon was assassinated outside his New
York City apartment building when Sean was just five years old. Still, it
was those few years that Sean got to spend with his father that shaped him
into the man he became.
In an interview with Marc Maron, Sean explained that on an almost daily
basis, someone will come up to him and say something to the effect of “You
have no idea what your dad meant to me” or “You can’t understand how
important your dad’s music is to me.”
It’s a strange claim, Sean explained, because of course he understands.
John Lennon and his music are even more important in Sean’s life. Because
John Lennon was Sean’s father. Because he has been holding on to that
relationship every minute since his father was taken from him. Because
John’s music is the only way he gets to talk to his son anymore.
Each parent should take to heart what that means: even the greatest
musician of all time is more important as a parent to his children than he is
as an artist to the world. It doesn’t matter how great our work is, how
wealthy it makes us, or what it ends up meaning to billions of people—
nothing will eclipse the impact we have on our kids.
March 27
It’s Okay to Be Ambitious
You have things you want to do in this life. Maybe you want to write a
book or you’re in the middle of starting a company. Maybe you’re trying to
win a championship or run for president. But you want to be a great parent
too, obviously, which necessarily makes your other goals more difficult to
achieve.
Is this a moral quandary? A Sophie’s choice? Is it possible to yearn for
personal achievement and desire to be a great parent and expect to
accomplish both? Or does one, as the stories of Justice Ginsburg’s and
Justice O’Connor’s early careers might remind us, require sacrifice from the
other?
For most of history, it’s been women who have felt the tension of these
conflicting desires the most and have been forced to choose one over the
other. Fathers, on the other hand, have been encouraged—expected even—
to look outside the home for fulfillment and recognition, because for men
professional success was good parenting.
As society has evolved, however, every parent has had to manage the
tension of serving two masters, even prime ministers and billionaires.
In her autobiography, Margaret Thatcher, the first woman to be UK prime
minister, quotes Irene Ward, a pioneering British politician: “While the
home must always be the centre of one’s life, it should not be the boundary
of one’s ambition.”
You’re allowed to think bigger. It’s okay to have a career and want to be
great at it. It’s okay to strive to change the world. Because in these things,
as long as you share them and open them up to a wider view, you are
teaching your kids about you and about the world. You are teaching them
about hard work, about doing what’s right, about fulfilling one’s potential,
about being of use to others.
March 28
It’s a Family Affair
Taylor Branch’s incredible series on Martin Luther King Jr. and the civil
rights movement spans three volumes. It’s almost three thousand pages with
hundreds of footnotes. It won awards like the Pulitzer Prize for Nonfiction
and the National Book Critics Circle Award.
Undoubtedly, Branch is quite pleased with this masterwork of historical
scholarship, which he spent untold hours researching, writing, editing, and
talking about. But there is a note tucked away in the acknowledgments of
the final volume that truly captures both the experience and the family
effort such an achievement required. Branch writes,
Our son, Franklin, who was born weeks before my first trip to the
Lorraine Motel, finished college in time to help me with my final
research.
Your kids are with you on this journey, whatever it is. It can be so easy to
see your career as something that is you-centric. It’s not. It’s a family affair.
The same is true of the ambitions of every member of your household. And
the more you can be involved with each other on these personal journeys,
the better. It makes the accomplishments sweeter, the work more
complete . . . and the sacrifices less painful. Because all of them have been
done together.
March 29
Here’s How to Spend More Time with Them
Every parent wishes they could have more time with their kids. We envy
the parents who don’t seem to have this problem, who don’t work the same
hours we do, who have the flexibility we dream about to spend more time
with their kids.
If only we could be so lucky . . .
The comedian Aziz Ansari tells a joke about a conversation he had with
the musician Frank Ocean. Marveling at the autonomy Ocean seems to have
in his career, Aziz asks how he gets away with making music only when he
wants, touring only when he wants, doing only the kinds of things he wants.
It’s not that hard, Ocean tells him; you just have to be comfortable
making less money.
If we’re being honest, how much of the time we spend away from our
kids for work is actually related to putting food on the table? How much of
it is truly rooted in need? In the basics of a healthy, sustainable life?
Probably not nearly as much as we tell ourselves (or them).
We work for other reasons—often good reasons—but not because we
have to. We could have more flexibility if we wanted. We could choose a
different job. We could choose to put family over career advancement, over
six- or seven-figure salaries, over keeping up with the Joneses.
Let us stop acting as if the freedom—and opportunity—we crave isn’t
within our grasp. We can spend more time with our kids. We can be there
more than we are. We just have to be comfortable making less money.
March 30
An Important Rule
The economist Russ Roberts lives his life by a number of rules and rituals.
He keeps Shabbat, for instance, and he commits to regularly tithing his
income. He has another rule, as a father, that we should all observe as
parents:
If your child offers you a hand to hold, take it.
Life and relationships are an endless dance of reaching out and pulling
away. You reach out to your kids, they pull away—they’re busy, they’re in
front of their friends, they’re mad at you. You try to help them and they
don’t want it. You want what’s best for them but they don’t understand.
We can’t control that. What we can control is that whenever they do
reach out—whenever they offer us a hand to hold—we take that
opportunity and grab it. When they want to lie in our bed with us, we can
let them. When they call on the phone, we can answer—even if we’re in a
meeting. When they ask to talk about something, we can listen, whatever
it’s about. We can hold them tight every chance we have.
We can’t demand that those things happen, but we can make a rule that
when they do, we take it for as long as it’s being given.
March 31
This Must Be the Top Priority
What does it actually look like to put family first? It looks like Ricky
Rubio letting it be known publicly that his professional basketball career
would be over before anyone expected. The NBA star said,
When my son starts school, the NBA will not be worth it. I will
have to go back [to Spain]. I don’t want to make him dizzy
moving around when he’s six years old, at the age of starting to
make friends. It was discussed with my wife and we have it very
clear. There will come a time when basketball will not be the
priority.
Will he follow through on this? Is our career inherently at odds with
being a good parent? That’s for him and for each of us to decide. Still, at
some point our kids must come first. We must do what’s best for them. We
must sacrifice for them. We must give them the life they deserve—a life
with us in it.
Your career is important. But family is forever. It must be the top priority.
APRIL
MASTER YOUR EMOTIONS
(LESSONS IN PATIENCE AND SELF-CONTROL)
April 1
Always Grab the Right Handle
Every event has two handles—one by which it can be carried, and one by which
it can’t. If your brother does you wrong, don’t grab it by his wronging, because
this is the handle incapable of lifting it. Instead, use the other—that he is your
brother, that you were raised together, and then you will have hold of the handle
that carries.
—EPICTETUS
Each day, possibly hundreds of times per day, you’re presented with
situations you have to deal with. A kid who lied to you about doing their
homework. A wife who snapped at you. A car that’s got to be taken in for
an oil change. A boss with their head up their ass. Grandparents whom your
kids love but who drive you nuts. A family you’ve got to get to the airport
two hours before takeoff.
How will you react? Will you get angry, pull away, argue, hold a grudge?
Or take a deep breath, have some empathy, apologize, let go a little bit, and
not be such a control freak?
Every day, with every situation, there is a choice. Which handle will we
grab? Which handle will we show our kids how to grab? The easy one? Or
the right one?
April 2
Your Job Is to Make Fast Transitions
The leadership coach Randall Stutman, who has worked with nearly every
major hedge fund and CEO on Wall Street, talks about what it means to be a
leader at home:
Your job as a leader is to make really fast transitions. You play
many different roles in many different places—your job is not to
carry the last conversation. . . . If that means you need to settle
yourself and sit out in your car for a couple of minutes before you
walk in the house so you can now be Dad, then that’s what you
need to do. But your job is not to walk into that house and carry
with you anything that came from before.
You can’t let a bad day or a bad person prevent you from being a good
parent. You can’t bring your garbage from the office into your home. You
must keep a clean house—free of the detritus of adult responsibility that
your kids couldn’t possibly understand. You must leave that stuff outside,
and you must do it quickly, in the space between leaving work and walking
into your home.
April 3
Again, Which Will It Be?
Anger always outlasts hurt. Best to take the opposite course. Would anyone think
it normal to return a kick to a mule or a bite to a dog?
—SENECA
Arthur Ashe’s time with his daughter was cut tragically short. At the end
of his memoir, as he lay dying, knowing how little time he had left, he
wrote some advice to her that touched on something we spoke about on
January 5.
“We are being watched by our ancestors, as I am watching you,” he told
her. “We possess more than they ever dreamed of having, so we must never
let them down.”
We are watched by our ancestors, yes, but we are also, as Bruce
Springsteen put it, haunted by their ghosts. Which will you be for your
child?
Are you the kind of example they need? Have you left the kind of legacy
that will protect them? That will guide them? That will inspire them to be
decent and disciplined, great and good, as Arthur did for his young
daughter? Or will you haunt them with your mistakes, with the pain you
inflicted on them, with the things left unsaid or unresolved?
April 4
You’re Too Old to Act Out
Being silly is still allowed, not excluded by adulthood. What’s excluded by
adulthood is thoughtlessness, so be thoughtful and silly.
—HANK GREEN
We have all sorts of rules of thumb for when various behaviors are age
appropriate: the age they should stop having accidents; the age they should
stop throwing a tantrum just because they’re tired; the age it stops being
okay for other people to have to pick up after them.
Then, when our kids mess up, we say: Aren’t you a little old to act this
way? Grow up!
Unfortunately, we apply this standard to ourselves far less often. Whether
it’s as serious as an affair or as silly as getting hangry because we neglected
to eat, we seem to forget that we should be policing ourselves first. Our kids
are at least still kids, even when they’re acting a bit beneath their age.
You’re an adult. What excuse do you have?
Remind yourself today and every day that you are getting older, that it’s
time to grow out of these silly habits you’ve lazily allowed yourself to fall
into. Remind yourself that you’re too old to act out, to stoop this low, to not
be responsible for yourself. And remember, your kids are always watching,
so act like the adult that they believe you are.
April 5
Don’t Forget How Small They Are
The world would be a terrible place without children, who bring with them
innocence, and the hope of man’s further perfection.
—JOHN RUSKIN
There’s a wrenching scene in the haunting novel The Sweet Hereafter. A
widowed husband is folding up the clothes of his late wife. He’s struck,
holding her things, by just how physically small she was. This tiny person
he loved and misses, she took up so much space in his heart, occupied so
much of his waking thoughts, that he came to see her as much bigger than
she really was.
This is true for our kids too. They take up so much space in our lives.
They have such big presences. They are so loud. So we can easily forget
that they are tiny, tiny people. They barely have control of themselves. They
are dwarfed by us physically, by our experiences, by our confidence in the
way things will go.
We have to be careful. Whether they are teenagers or toddlers, we can’t
forget how small they are. When they fall asleep in the car and you carry
them to bed, take a second to notice their size. As you pack up their stuff to
take them to college, take a look at just how little stuff they have—because
their life is still so new.
The smaller you realize your kids are, the kinder you will be. The more
protective and patient you will be. The more you will appreciate how hard
they are trying to figure things out—themselves, their relationships, the
world.
They are so tiny. Don’t forget it.
April 6
Are You Using This Power?
Between stimulus and response there is a space. In that space is our power to
choose our response.
—VIKTOR FRANKL
In her book Bringing Up Bébé, the author Pamela Druckerman talks about
“le pause”—the pause—as the secret to French parenting. Druckerman
describes it in the context of sleep training, but le pause can actually be a
great strategy for parents in all facets of their kids’ lives.
When your son trips and falls, do you need to rush over? Or can you
pause and let him figure out how hurt he is first, whether he wants or needs
to cry? When your daughter comes over and tries to tell you something, do
you have to complete her sentences? Or can you pause and let her struggle
to find the words and work through what she is trying to say? When your
teenager announces that they are quitting the basketball team, do you have
to start arguing right away? Or can you pause and listen to their reasons and
what they want to do instead? When your kid is home from college and
scratches the car while borrowing it for the weekend, what if you don’t get
upset? Can you pause and consider that it was almost certainly not
intentional?
As parents, we have to choose our responses wisely, not reflexively. We
have to suspend judgment, listen, and think things over. We have to practice
le pause so that our kids never have to stop and think about whether they
will come to us with their problems, their questions, their hopes, and their
dreams.
April 7
You Have to Move On
Let the dead Past bury its dead!
—HENRY WADSWORTH LONGFELLOW
Remember that time you really needed your dad and he wasn’t there?
Because he had his own emotional issues. Because he worked too much.
Because he was an alcoholic. Remember how your mother’s overweening
affection made you feel smothered or small? Remember how her strictness
kept you from enjoying the things that children should get to enjoy?
Remember her jealousy or her pettiness or her mood swings? Remember
how their self-absorption seemed to make everything—including the things
you really needed help with—about them?
Of course you remember. How could you not? These were defining
experiences. They hurt so much. And now you’re angry. As you should be.
They had a job they were supposed to do. And they didn’t do it—not well,
anyway. You, the innocent child, suffered for this. You carry the wounds of
their failure.
But here’s the thing: you have to move on. As justified as your anger is—
as ongoing as these behaviors may still be with your parents—you have to
get beyond this. Because now you have children of your own. And they
deserve a parent who is all there. Not one who is clinging to the past. Not
one who is putting his or her baggage on their shoulders.
It will not be easy moving on. No one said it will be. You’ll have to
process it. You’ll have to go to therapy. Or read books. Or find a support
group. You’ll have to sit alone with your thoughts. You’ll have to forgive—
or cut people out of your life. As they say: your problems might not be your
fault, but they are your responsibility.
It’s your responsibility to move on. Your kids need you to. You need to.
April 8
To Have a More Peaceful Home, Have Fewer of These
These things are not asking to be judged by you. Leave them alone.
—MARCUS AURELIUS
At the core of most of the conflict between parents and children—and so
often spouses—is one thing: judgment. We have opinions and they have
opinions, and these opinions are the source of disagreement. If we, as
parents, would like to have a better relationship with our children, there is
one simple thing we can do: we can have fewer opinions.
Do you really need to have an opinion on what kind of food is served at
your daughter’s wedding (even if you are paying for it)? Do you need to
have an opinion on the way they do their hair? Their friends are their
friends—what does it matter what you think of them or their parents? So
what if they like music that sounds weird to you? So what if they want to
raise their own kids a different way?
Few things in life are better off with your judgment hovering over
them . . . your family most of all.
April 9
Leave It at the Door
All day at work you experience stress. You witness other people’s
stupidity. You are the victim of their moods and emotions. Your phone
pings constantly with alarming news of the world, the pangs and envies that
drive social media.
What are you to do? Much in the way that politics are supposed to stop at
the water’s edge, so must the stresses of the world stop at the threshold of
your front door. You can’t bring that crap home with you. You definitely
can’t have it running on CNN in the background while you eat dinner as a
family.
As Randall Stutman said, you need to make that fast transition from
frustrated professional to fully present parent so that your home remains a
safe place that you are the protector of. Not a protector in the sense of a
warrior but closer to the role of a bouncer: No, sorry, you’re not on the
guest list. You have to be Teflon. Your boss’s temper can’t be allowed to
stick to you. The contagion of panic or divisiveness shouldn’t be tracked
into the living room on the bottom of your shoes. You must keep a clean
house. You must turn these things away.
When you arrive home, you must be ready to be present. Ready to have
fun. Ready to be the parent they need . . . not the one that’s left over after
the ravages of the day.
April 10
Embrace This Mindset
In Tibet, Buddhist monks make beautiful mandalas out of sand. They
spend hours, even days, crafting these complex, geometric designs . . . only
to wipe them clean and start over as soon as they’re finished.
Isn’t that a way we might see all the work we do as parents?
You clean, then the house is dirty. You do the dishes, then five minutes
later the sink is full again. Literally before you’ve even finished helping
your kids put their toys away, the toys are splayed out across the floor.
Those new clothes you just bought them? Now they’re filthy and frayed.
This can drive you nuts if you let it. It can piss you off. Or you can learn
to love it. You can learn to see it all like the mandala—an unending,
ephemeral process that we begin again and again and again. You can learn
to see it not as work we’re doing but as art. Finish? To be finished would
mean the end of this—the end of their childhood, the end of our lives
together.
No, we like that it’s a little bit like Groundhog Day. We love that it means
a chance to wake up and do this with them again.
To do it beautifully. To do it well. To do it together.
April 11
Don’t Be Mad at Good People
Speak when you are angry and you will make the best speech you will ever
regret.
—AMBROSE BIERCE
When you lose your temper, whom does it inevitably seem to be with?
Your family. It’s strange. We’ll stomach some pretty rude behavior from
strangers on the street, but God forbid your son leaves his shoes out! You
were professional while asking your assistant (for the thousandth time) to
do something, but you’ll get short with your spouse because they couldn’t
hear you over the noise in the other room.
It feels like a paradox, but really this is a problem of proximity. Precisely
because they’re closest to you, you have more opportunities to get upset
with them than with anyone else. It’s a sad, twisted state of affairs. The
people who are all bad but far away are rarely targets for our rage. But the
people who are mostly good—who on the whole have helped and loved us
many times more than they’ve hurt us—they’re the ones who get the brunt
of it?
“Let’s not be angry at good people,” Seneca writes in “On Anger.”
Today, when you find yourself getting upset at someone you love, remind
yourself that their positive traits far outweigh whatever is bothering you in
the moment. Remind yourself that yelling doesn’t make them hear you
better. Remind yourself that they probably know they messed up and
probably feel bad enough already. Remind yourself how small they are.
Remind yourself how good they are.
The fact that we can get mad at someone, because they love us enough to
put up with it or because they’re kids and they just have to live with it (and
us), is not an excuse. We should try not to get upset with anyone, but if we
are going to get mad, let’s make sure the object of our frustration is a target
of offense, not of opportunity.
April 12
What Kind of Energy Are You Bringing?
The ubiquity of the word energy these days is probably a sign of how
pervasive pseudoscience and charlatans have become in our culture. We are
inundated with energy healers and energy crystals. You can hire consultants
to analyze your company’s energy. You can take a sound bath to remove
negative energy or have an aura reader interpret the energy you put out into
the world. The amount of sage that has been burned in apartments after
breakups rivals the amount of sage that has been used in restaurant dishes.
Yet for all that nonsense, energy is a real thing in parenting. Just as Cesar
Millan talks about projecting the right energy to your dog, so too can your
kids pick up on the energy emanating from you. Bad day at work? They can
feel it. Hate where you live? They can feel it. Pissed off at your spouse?
They can tell, even if you argue only when they’re asleep.
Why are your kids running around like crazy, acting like monsters today?
Well, maybe you ought to check what kind of energy you’re generating.
Why is your son hitting his little brother? Maybe because you’re a ball of
tension and frustration, and it’s contagious. Why is your daughter being
such a terror? Maybe that resentment your wife is holding onto has
something to do with it. Maybe your daughter just couldn’t stand how
things were at breakfast this morning—how awkward and weird it was.
When you see behavior and attitude problems, adjust your energy. Look
in the mirror first. If you want a happy home, a home with kindness and
love and peace, then bring that energy with you. Project it consciously and
deliberately—show that things are good with you, and they will be better
with everyone else.
April 13
This Is Their Language
The primary language of children is behavior. Not words. If you want to
know what they’re thinking or how they’re feeling, watch what they do, not
what they say.
When we say that “actions speak louder than words,” this is what we
mean. The younger your kids are, the more likely they are to speak entirely
with actions instead of words. This is for one simple, undeniable reason:
they don’t have the words yet. But even if they did, kids don’t understand
their feelings—the physical ones or the emotional ones—enough to know
how to put words to them. Quite often they don’t even know they’re having
feelings.
Watch an eighteen-month-old with an earache—there are no words, there
is only discomfort and pawing at the side of their head or waking up in the
middle of the night screaming. Watch an eight-year-old with anxiety—there
are no words, there are only stomachaches and panic and wet beds. A
teenager who has been hurt by someone may in turn hurt others.
This is why we need to “listen” to our kids in more ways than just the
obvious, literal way. We have to watch them. We have to be patient. We
have to understand that a screaming tantrum about the iPad is almost
certainly about something else. We have to understand that lethargy and
sliding grades are statements; they are symptoms. It’s your child speaking
to you through behavior.
Will you hear them? Will you be able to talk to them about it, not just
with your words but with your own actions?
April 14
It’s the Hardest Thing
Chesty Puller fought in the banana wars. He fought in guerrilla wars. He
took islands in the Pacific during World War II. He fought in Korea. So
you’d think that he would have been able to handle just about anything life
threw at him. But like you, he was a parent, and he found that it was just
about the hardest thing a person can ever do.
When he was just home from Korea, where he had landed at Inchon and
fought in the brutal cold at close quarters, Chesty and his wife had to take
their daughter to get her tonsils out. Chesty, who had always been a
sweetheart underneath, carried the girl to the operating room. Talking to her
softly, he tried to lay her down on the bed and let the nurse prepare her for
surgery. But his daughter, scared and overwhelmed, refused to let go. She
cried and screamed and clung to him until they were eventually able to
separate and sedate her. “She will never forgive me, Virginia,” he said to his
wife when he returned to the waiting room. “This is worse than Peleliu.”
He was only half exaggerating. This thing called parenthood demands
more of us than just about anything else in life. It challenges us emotionally,
physically, mentally. It tugs on every one of our heartstrings. You can
toughen yourself up for war, you can coolly bet millions of dollars at work,
but there’s nothing you can do about the gaping soft spot your kids have
access to. Nothing can get you quite like they do  .  .  . because nothing
matters to you quite like they do.
This is the hardest thing you’ll ever do. Know it. Accept it. Be grateful
for it.
April 15
Have You Seen Their Perspective?
Have my parents forgotten that they were young once? Apparently, they have.
—ANNE FRANK
We think they’re making excuses. We think they’re making stuff up. We
just want them to go back and sleep in their bed. Or listen to their coach. Or
get their work done. It’s fine, we tell them. Just give it a try. Wear your
jacket; it’s not that uncomfortable. Do your homework; it’s not that
difficult.
Do you remember reading To Kill a Mockingbird? Where Atticus talks
about climbing into somebody’s skin and walking around in it? Well, have
you actually done that? Not with someone you pity or someone you wish to
be, but with someone you aspire to lead and teach and nourish? Someone
like your own child?
Your kid wakes up and comes into your room at night? Try sleeping in
their bed. Maybe it really is scary in there. Watch hockey practice. Maybe
the coach really is a jerk. How do you think that jacket feels to a kid?
Maybe it really is way too hot in there. Did you like doing your homework
when you were their age?
See their perspective. Crawl inside it, walk around in it. Then take a step
back and parent accordingly.
April 16
This Solves Most Problems
Any experienced parent can tell you about the magical panacea called
food.
Why is your kid screaming? Why are they terrorizing their sibling? Why
can’t they focus during homeschooling? Why can’t they fall asleep? Why is
your teenager so moody?
The answer is simple. They are hungry. They’re hangry. And they don’t
know it.
Moms have long carried snacks in their purses for a reason. Because it
will solve most problems. Soothe most frayed nerves. Calm down most
difficult situations.
Somebody always forgets to eat. So feed them. Ask them if they’re
hungry. Remind them that they’re hungry. Keep a tight meal schedule.
Watch what happens.
Oh, also, when you’re grouchy and frustrated and anxious and short with
your spouse and your kids—you might be hangry yourself. In 2014,
researchers from Ohio State University found that most fights between
couples are because someone is hungry. So, like taking a walk or taking five
deep breaths, grabbing something to eat will probably solve most of your
adult problems too.
April 17
Do You Know What You Look Like Angry?
It has often been useful for angry people to look in a mirror. The great
transformation in themselves has disturbed them.
—SENECA
Anger might feel deserved or appropriate, but it almost always looks
awful.
The next time you are out, try watching for other parents who are getting
angry at something their kids are doing. Observe the crowd at your son or
daughter’s next soccer game. Track that family traveling on vacation at the
airport. Pay attention to the group at the big family table across from you at
the pizza place.
It’s as close to a look in the mirror as you’re likely to get.
How do you think you look when you tell your child way too loudly, “Sit
down. I told you already, sit down!” when they bounce around with too
much energy? How do you think you look as you grab their arm in
frustration and jerk them closer to you in line? Do you think you sound
good when threatening to take away some basic privilege of theirs—like a
tyrant—because they’re not behaving exactly as you like? Or when you
shout at them to hurry up at the airport? You think you don’t look like a
monster when, after the argument escalates beyond your ability to manage
with words, you slap them across the face?
You look terrible. You look as awful and shameful as the people looked
when you saw them do the same thing in public, to their kids, as you tried
to avert your gaze. No one looks good angry. Worse still, that image can
etch itself into our kids’ brains for a long time.
April 18
This Is the Enemy
Do not be afraid to get rid of things which distract your attention.
—LEO TOLSTOY
You’re distracted because this weird work email just came in. You’re in a
bad mood because of something you saw. You’re feeling off because of
something somebody said to you. And what happens? Well, your kids get
the brunt of it. Or they get only 50 percent of you at dinner, because you’re
home but not really home.
Preoccupation is the enemy of good parenting. And the worst part? Kids
can sense it. They are simultaneously sponges and mirrors, and unflattering
ones at that. When they act out, make a mess, bite their brother, dye their
hair pink—that’s what is happening. They sense your energy and are
responding to it.
The sad truth is that most of what we’re preoccupied with doesn’t even
matter. We give the jerk at the office free space in our head. We choose to
go on Twitter and doomscroll. We don’t need to check our email as much as
we do. Worrying about money never solves our money problems.
We have to push all that stuff away. So we can be present. So we can be
patient. So we can be parents.
April 19
Don’t Waste These Opportunities
Yes, it was annoying—those hours delayed at the airport on the way to
your vacation. Yes, it was disappointing when your daughter came home
with a terrible report card. Yes, it was scary when you came home with that
diagnosis from your doctor. Yes, it was exhausting that you spent another
sleepless night with your toddler.
But the question, or rather the opportunity, is: Did it bring you closer
together?
It doesn’t have to, of course. You can get angry. You can be annoyed.
You can be overwhelmed and distracted. Or  .  .  . or you can relish the
moment—even if they’re crying, even if you’re disappointed, even if you’re
crying. You can feel love and gratefulness and happiness instead.
Because this is a chance to talk. This is a chance to see them from a
different angle. This is a chance to ask questions. This is a chance to spend
time together. A crisis, as politicians like to say, is a terrible thing to waste.
It’s a chance to do things you couldn’t do before. Things that wouldn’t be
possible in ordinary circumstances.
It’s always a chance to get closer. To love more. To understand better.
April 20
It’s Not Fair
Old people are always very impatient with young ones. Fathers always expect
their sons to have their virtues without their faults.
—WINSTON CHURCHILL
We expect so much of our kids. We push them. We prod them. We tell
them what to do. We punish them—however lightly—when they fall short.
What we lose track of is how impossible our expectations often are for
these little humans who lack the decades of life experience we’re absent-
mindedly taking for granted.
There is no blueprint. To assume there is or, worse, to imagine there is
and then hold your kids to those expectations is wildly unfair. Can we have
expectations for our kids? Yes. Can we try to make sure they don’t fall into
the same traps or develop the same vices as us? It would be criminal if we
didn’t.
But we have to remember that they are like us  .  .  . for better and for
worse. They’ve lived their whole lives in the same house as us. They’ve
learned from our examples—even the bad ones . . . especially the bad ones
in many cases. They’re not going to be perfect. They’re going to have our
weaknesses . . . perhaps some of their own too. And to punish them with
our unrealistic expectations, even unintentionally, quite literally for the sins
of the father, is profoundly unfair.
Our job is to love them and to be patient with them, not to demand the
impossible from them.
April 21
Don’t Ever, Ever Do This
[Cato the Elder] used to say that a man who beats his wife or child is laying
sacrilegious hands on the most sacred thing in the world.
—PLUTARCH
Thankfully, we’re at a place in history where most people don’t need to
hear this anymore, but unfortunately, some people still do. Maybe they’re
reading this book. Maybe they’re not. But it’s worth laying it down again;
it’s worth a reminder of the precious treasure you’ve been entrusted with.
To raise your hand, open or closed, to your spouse or your children is
unacceptable.
It doesn’t matter how angry you are. It doesn’t matter who started it. It
doesn’t matter how many times you told your son. It doesn’t matter that
your parents used to do it. It doesn’t matter that some cultures still accept it.
For two thousand years, we’ve known deep down that it’s wrong. You are
here to protect and to serve and to love them. To violate that obligation
because you can’t control yourself in the moment, because you’re mad?
This is to violate a sacred oath. And once done, it can never be undone.
You cannot do it. Ever.
April 22
Is It Good When They’re Bad?
In a New York Times piece, Melinda Wenner Moyer (author of the fantastic
How to Raise Kids Who Aren’t Assholes) asks you to consider perhaps the
most counterintuitive idea in all of parenting: that maybe, just maybe, it’s
not such a big deal when your kids misbehave. Perhaps, she proposes, this
is actually a sign of how loved and safe they feel. She writes:
Think of it this way: When kids are always respectful, complacent
and obedient with adults, it is often because they are afraid of
those adults. It’s not a coincidence that people who boast about
how well behaved their children are may also be those who throw
around phrases like, “Spare the rod, spoil the child.”
This is not to say that chaos is a good thing, that no rules should be
enforced. It’s a reminder that before you write yourself off as a terrible
parent because your kid challenged you or because they had a meltdown,
consider what it means that they feel comfortable doing that in front of you.
It might actually be that they do listen to you—especially when you tell
them that you’re there for them, that you love them unconditionally, that
you want them to think for themselves. It’s possible they actually respect
you quite deeply. But even more than that, it could be that they trust you
more than anyone in the world.
April 23
Don’t Thrust Them Away
Of course, kids can be annoying. Painfully so.
Kids scream in your ears and ruin your clothes with their food- and dirt-
covered hands. Kids can cut off your air supply as they crawl onto your
back for a piggyback ride.
Yet you have to absorb all of this. Even though it hurts. Even though you
love that shirt. Even though you can’t breathe. You can’t thrust them away.
Yes, of course, you have to explain to them what’s appropriate and what
isn’t. You have to protect your own physical well-being. But the point is,
they have no idea yet how their actions affect other people. Even teenagers
don’t fully comprehend the concept of consequences, of cause and effect.
(Why do you think they drive like crazy, eat like crap, and talk all kinds of
trash?) What they do comprehend is you getting upset, you pulling away.
Kids can feel your energy changing, even if they can’t put words to what
it is they are sensing or how it makes them feel. And what’s most difficult
about all this is that it very well might be this painful, confusing feeling—as
provoked and instinctual as it is—that sticks with them forever. So work on
getting control of yourself. Work on toughening yourself up a bit.
You can gently unwrap their arms from your throat. You can get a new
shirt. You can turn the game around and chase them instead. You can make
what was annoying become fun. You can talk to them calmly, correct them,
and then gently turn the pain into a moment of profound connection. That’s
entirely up to you.
April 24
What If Someone Else Treated Your Kids This Way?
If you hired a babysitter or a nanny and caught them staring at their phone
instead of watching your kids, you’d be livid. If you walked into a room
and discovered a teacher or a grandparent or anyone yelling at your kids,
you’d be difficult to stop. If you heard someone make a snide remark or
tease them or bully them, you’d put an immediate end to it.
And yet  .  .  . you do some of these things all the time! You feel your
frustration rising as they refuse to listen and bam, you grab their arm and
yell, “STOP IT NOW!” right into their little faces. You’re ignoring the track
meet. You tune out their incessant attempts to get your attention. Worse,
your attention is elsewhere while they’re playing in the pool . . . and for
what? For an email? For a text? To scroll Twitter? You think you’re funny
and you like to joke around . . . but if you saw someone else doing it, you
know what you’d call it? You’d call it bullying.
We’d never let anyone else get away with what we rationalize or excuse
of our own behavior. That’s not to say you’re abusive or a bad parent—not
at all. It’s just a reminder: Your job isn’t just to protect your kids from other
people. It’s to protect them from your own bad habits, your own temper,
your own flaws too. It’s to demand of yourself what you’d expect from
anyone to whom you’d entrust your children’s safety. That is to say: you
have to demand the best of yourself.
No excuses. No double standards. Watch yourself as you’d watch a
nanny cam. Trust but verify, just as you would a new school or day care.
Ask yourself: Would I let anyone else get away with what I’m doing right
now?
April 25
Delay, Delay, Delay
An angry man opens his mouth and shuts his eyes.
—CATO THE ELDER
Seneca said that “delay is the greatest remedy for anger.” That’s the truth.
Delay is the best way to let your mind clear, to make sure that anger
doesn’t drive you to do something you regret. Anger is an exaggerator. It
magnifies the worst in every situation. Anger is an exacerbator too. It takes
a bad situation and makes it worse with the overreaction it produces in us.
Delay will help you make sure that doesn’t happen, that anger doesn’t
win. The next time you’re angry, take five deep breaths and see if you can
get yourself that wound up again. It’s next to impossible.
Now, no one is saying you can’t respond at all. You probably will have to
address whatever has made your blood boil. You will have to say
something. Your kids do need to learn that lying is not acceptable, talking
back to their mother will not be tolerated, leaving the stove on could burn
the house down. But wait a minute. Take a walk. Put a reminder down to
bring it up tomorrow. Deal with it when you get home from work. Let
cooler heads prevail.
Make it a teachable moment. Teach them that it’s possible to control how
you react.
April 26
The Moments of Leniency Matter
To err is human; to forgive, divine.
—ALEXANDER POPE
In Georgia in the mid-1930s, when he was but ten years old, Jimmy Carter
was fishing with his father. As they caught fish, his father attached their
growing haul to a trotline that he hooked onto Jimmy’s belt loop, a point of
great pride for the boy.
But then, several hours later, Jimmy looked down and realized that the
line had broken or become unclipped without him noticing. Frantically,
desperately, he dove into the water, searching, hoping, terrified his father
would be upset. “What’s wrong?” his father asked. “I’ve lost the fish,
Daddy.” “All of them?” his father replied. “Yes, sir, yes, sir” was all Jimmy
could say through his tears.
“Daddy was rarely patient with foolishness or mistakes,” Carter would
reflect eighty years later. But then, after a long pause, his father smiled and
said, “Let them go, Hot. There are a lot more fish in the river. We’ll get
them tomorrow.” All those years later, it was this moment of patience and
kindness and forgiveness that Carter remembered. The fish no longer
mattered; in fact, they never did matter. What mattered was that his father
knew what Jimmy needed in that moment.
What about you? Do you understand the power of leniency and
tolerance? Can you let things go? Can you control your temper and
frustrations? Do you know when it’s time to push and when it’s time to pull
them in close to you?
April 27
You’re the Voice in Their Heads
The power broker in your life is the voice that no one hears. How well you revisit
the tone and content of your private voice is what determines the quality of your
life.
—DR. JIM LOEHR
You’re just trying to get them to behave, to listen to you, to stop hitting
their sister, to take school seriously, to do whatever. So you speak firmly,
even harshly. You’re tired, you’ve had this conversation a thousand times,
you’re not as kind as you could be. Maybe you try to make a joke out of it,
to soften the delivery of your honest opinion about what they’re doing—
except the joke hits a soft spot and cuts too close to the bone.
You know what you’re doing, really, in these moments? You’re
cementing a very specific voice in their head.
Everything we say, every interaction we have with our kids, is shaping
them. How we speak to them informs how they will speak to themselves. If
you want proof of this, think about all the complexes and scripts you picked
up from your parents—maybe things you’re working on in therapy right
now, decades later.
So while you can, before it’s too late . . . catch yourself. Think about how
you can be an ancestor instead of a ghost. Make this interaction a kind one,
a patient one, a friendly one. Speak to them the way you’d want them to
speak to themselves. Because it’s not a matter of if they will internalize the
things they heard growing up; it’s a matter of what they will internalize. Put
a good voice in their head so they might remember the good stuff.
April 28
Do You Really Care?
A key point to bear in mind. . . . You’re better off not giving the small things
more time than they deserve.
—MARCUS AURELIUS
It seems like it’s really important to you. That the door not be slammed.
That the chores be done a certain way. That everything be put away
immediately. That feet go on the ground, not the furniture.
But the truth is, you don’t actually care about the things themselves. You
don’t. If you had to choose between your kids having fond memories and
you having clean walls, you’d choose your kids having fun. If you had to
choose between slightly lower grades and better self-worth, you’d choose
their self-worth. If you had to choose between just about anything and your
kids’ safety, happiness, and self-image, you’d never choose that other stuff.
Yet here you are, arguing about it again. Choosing to die on some stupid
hill. Choosing to protect a piece of Sheetrock that—admit it—you don’t
actually care about. What you really care about—what these rules actually
represent—is obedience and control. What you’re really worried about,
hence the fixation, is the deep-seated anxiety that you might be screwing
them up.
Relax! Let this stuff go. Seriously, just let it go. You won’t regret it.
April 29
How Long Can You Go?
Kind people are never involved in arguments, and those who like to argue are
never kind.
—LAO TZU
At the end of it, you’ll wish you’d fought less with your kids. You’ll wish
you’d made less of an issue of so many things. Nobody looks back on their
lives or their kids’ lives and thinks: I’m so glad we got in all those
arguments. I’m glad I was so hard on them. I’m glad they finally learned all
the rules.
You know this. Okay, so today, how long can you go?
How long can you go without chiding your kids about this or that?
Without making remarks about your teenager’s choices? Without reminding
your young one to stop dragging their feet, leaning on the table, leaving
their things lying about?
See if you can make the majority of your interactions uncritical. That
doesn’t mean you have to be disingenuously positive about them, only that
you try to stop bothering them about so much piddly crap. None of that
stuff matters now—as much as you might try to convince them, and
yourself, otherwise—and it definitely won’t matter years from now when
you’re all reflecting on your lives together.
So dial back the criticism. Remember: you don’t need to have an opinion
about everything. If you can keep some of that stuff in your back pocket,
you’ll both be happier for it.
April 30
Who Gets Your Patience?
The father of the former chancellor of Germany Angela Merkel was a
pastor in East Germany. He was beloved by his flock. He forged a deep
bond with them over many years. But at home, things were a little different.
At home, he was stern and impatient. “What really made me angry as a
child was his way of showing so much understanding for everyone else,”
his daughter would reflect, “but if we children did something wrong, his
reaction was completely different.”
Clearly he was capable of being understanding and kind—he did it all
day every day as part of his job. But maybe that was the problem: he’d used
up all his patience at work and had none left for his family when he got
home. Or maybe he held himself to a different standard professionally than
personally, because it wasn’t in public. Or maybe he made the mistake that
many of us do, forgetting that our children are little people with the same
problems as everyone else, just of a different size. And because of that, we
sometimes fail to treat them with the appropriate level of dignity, respect,
and compassion.
You don’t yell at a colleague just because they left a door open. You
don’t punish one of your players for wanting more of your attention and
counsel. And yet children all over the world, throughout all time, can speak
to relationships where that was the exact kind of treatment they received
from parents who were at the end of their ropes and had run out of patience.
Be kind to your family. Make sure they get the same patience and
understanding as everyone else. Actually, scratch that. Make sure they get
more. Because long after you’ve left this job or stopped coaching that team,
they will still be your kids.
MAY
CHARACTER IS FATE
(LESSONS IN RIGHT AND WRONG)
May 1
This Predicts Everything
Character is fate.
—HERACLITUS
Who a person is determines what will happen and what they can do. It’s
true in sports. It’s true in politics. It’s true in business. No matter how
talented a person is, how great the incentives, how great the system around
them—in the end, character is everything. It can’t be hidden. It can’t be
compensated for.
It comes out.
Your job as a parent, as you seek to create a better world for your kids
and raise them to be good in that world, is to value character. To teach it to
them. To model it for them. To reward it when you see it in them. Yes, you
want them to be smart. Yes, you want them to be ambitious. Yes, you want
them to be creative and hardworking. But these traits are worthless if not
yoked behind good character.
We’re seeing the costs of ignoring that fact in every facet of life right
now. We need to fix it. And the fix starts at home.
May 2
Your Character Builds Theirs
The image of the black Escalade crashed into the tree was everywhere.
Then women began to come forward—first one, then another, then still
more. Eventually, he admitted it. Tiger Woods confessed to extramarital
infidelity . . . with more than 120 women.
It was news to almost everyone. But those who knew him were less
surprised. And those who knew him well weren’t surprised at all. Tiger
Woods’s biographers Jeff Benedict and Armen Keteyian note the “well-
worn clichés”: “Like father like son . . . The apple doesn’t fall far from the
tree.” For years, when Earl Woods took his son Tiger to golf tournaments
around the country, he didn’t make “any effort to camouflage his vices.”
Women came and went from hotel rooms. He’d stop at convenience stores
and come out with paper bags holding forty-ounce bottles of liquor. He’d
ask waitresses to join him for a cigarette.
The gambling, the waitresses, the infidelity—it wasn’t out of character
for Tiger. It was his character, or rather, it was character traits taught by his
father. Built from the blueprint drawn from his father’s example. The apple
didn’t fall far from the tree, because the tree made the apple.
May 3
Nourish This Wonderful Trait
The primary and most important influence on Queen Victoria was not her
mother but her beloved governess Baroness Lehzen, who later became her
adviser and friend.
It was from Louise Lehzen that Victoria got the backbone that made her
one of England’s great queens—one who ruled for some sixty-three years,
more than forty of them by herself. As Lehzen said with trademark
modesty:
I have, to be sure, not created, but nourished in the Princess, one
quality which is to test, consider, and to stand firmly by that
which the Princess finds right and good.
You have a lot of responsibilities as a parent, but none of them trump this
one. Yes, you want your kids to be smart. You want them to be helpful and
healthy. You want them to do well in school. But none of that will be
possible without having nourished the ability that Lehzen helped Victoria
cultivate.
So do it. Every day.
May 4
Teach Them These Four Virtues
If, at some point in your life, you should come across anything better than justice,
truth, self-control, courage—it must be an extraordinary thing indeed.
—MARCUS AURELIUS
Aristotle worshipped them. The Christians and Stoics too. In the West, we
call them the “cardinal virtues”—from the Latin word cardo, which means
“hinge.” These are the virtues upon which the good life hinges. These are
the virtues that every parent is obligated to teach their children:
Courage: To stand up. To charge ahead. To not be afraid or timid
in life.
Moderation: To know balance. To be in control of oneself. To
avoid excess or extremes.
Justice: To do the right thing. To care for others. To do your duty.
Wisdom: To learn. To study. To keep an open mind.
Those are the four essential tenets for living.
As a parent, you must worship these virtues . . . and raise kids who do the
same. You have to model these virtues and teach them—by example and by
instruction—how they can too. Their life—and the future—hinges on it.
May 5
Everything You Do Is Teaching Them
Preach the Gospel at all times. Use words if necessary.
—FRANCIS OF ASSISI
As a young man, the champion boxer and civil rights activist Floyd
Patterson was all trouble. He stole. He skipped school. He got into fights.
He once, tragically, took a picture of himself and scratched out the eyes
looking back at him—because he didn’t like himself. So finally the
authorities sent him away.
It could have been another sad chapter in a sad life. Instead, Patterson
was lucky enough to be sent away to a boys’ commune in upstate New
York. There, under the guidance of a kind and unconventional psychologist,
Dr. Papanek, Patterson’s world was changed. For the first time, he was seen.
He was more than “reformed,” in the language of the American prison
system; he was loved. As Dr. Papanek explained his philosophy:
Punishment teaches the child only how to punish. Scolding
teaches him how to scold. By showing him that we understand,
we teach him to understand. By helping him, we teach him to
help. He learns cooperation by cooperating.
Most likely, your children have not found themselves in such serious
trouble. Hopefully they are not as far gone as most of the people around
Floyd felt he was. Regardless, the lesson is the same: In everything we do
with, to, and around our kids, we are teaching them. Even when we mean
well, even when they are screwing up, just as Dr. Papanek explained, we are
teaching . . . often the very opposite of what we’d like to show them.
May 6
Teach Them to Sweep the Sheds
The New Zealand All Blacks are the most successful rugby franchise of all
time. They have a legacy that rivals the great teams in nearly every other
sport, from the San Antonio Spurs to the New England Patriots to the U.S.
women’s national soccer team. How have they done this?
By being tough, of course. By being extremely talented, obviously. But
there is a lesser-known and counterintuitive element to their success as
well: they clean up after themselves. In his book Legacy, James Kerr
portrays the team tidying up the locker room after a game:
Sweeping the sheds.
Doing it properly.
So no one else has to.
Because no one looks after the All Blacks.
The All Blacks look after themselves.
If you want your kids to clean up after themselves, you have to teach
them why it matters. If you want them to look after themselves, you have to
teach them to find pride and satisfaction in that. If you want them to sweep
the sheds, you have to teach them that it isn’t just a chore. It’s a statement of
priority. A statement of character and commitment and self-sufficiency—an
illustration of who you are.
How we do anything is how we do everything is the lesson parents have
to pass along to their kids. Leaving a mess isn’t just a mess—it shows that
you’re a mess.
May 7
Don’t Give Them an Ego
You love your kids more than anything. You think they’re God’s gift
(which they are, to you!). You want them to know how you feel about them,
and you feel bad when they feel bad about themselves. These are all
perfectly healthy and laudable feelings.
At the same time, we have to make sure we’re not puffing up their ego
with our endless praise. We have to manage our natural bias toward their
virtues and limit our blindness to their vices. As Seneca wrote, this requires
speaking honestly—with kindness—and holding them accountable for their
actions. Even if that pains us. He explains:
Flattery must be kept well out of the way of children. Let a child
hear the truth, and sometimes fear it: let him always reverence it.
Let him rise in the presence of his elders. Let him obtain nothing
by flying into a passion: let him be given when he is quiet what
was refused him when he cried for it. Let him behold, but not
make use of his father’s wealth: let him be reproved for what he
does wrong.
Seneca knew this balance was not easy—it isn’t for any parent. But if our
goal is to raise well-adjusted, self-aware kids, we’ll have to work for it.
Even if our instinct is to rush over and tell them they’re the greatest, most
specialest little kiddos there ever were.
May 8
Punishment Should Make Them Better
To punish others is like putting more wood in the fire. Every crime already has
punishment in itself, and it is more cruel and more just than the punishment
created by people.
—LEO TOLSTOY
Randall Stutman is asked a lot about parenting by the CEOs and
executives with whom he works as a leadership coach. We already know his
admonition about making fast transitions between work and home, but he
has another piece of advice for high-powered leaders who also want to be
great parents:
Punishment should make them better.
It’s pretty fitting advice coming from a coach too. Think about it: A
basketball coach who is disappointed in someone’s effort makes them do
sprints or push-ups. It’s not fun and it makes the kid stronger. A football
player who didn’t make their GPA has to go to extra study sessions. An
athlete who gets in trouble off the court might have to do community
service or write an apology letter. These are more than simple deterrents.
They’re punishments that make the transgressors better both as players and
as people.
When you get upset, when you catch your kid doing something they’re
not supposed to do, make sure that you don’t punish them from a place of
heightened emotion—whether that’s anger or fear or shame. Take a minute.
Come up with a punishment that makes them better. Something that they
wouldn’t choose to do but that is good for them. Vocab drills. Memorizing
state capitals. Volunteering somewhere. Picking up trash. Painting the
house.
They won’t like it, but one day they may actually thank you for it.
May 9
Too Busy to Be Bad
Harry Truman was once asked if he ever got in trouble as a kid. “Very,
very seldom,” he said. “I was too busy. I told you I’d read all three thousand
books in the library by the time I was fourteen years old.” Were there any
troublemakers in your neighborhood or at school? “We had boys who were
terrible,” he said. “But I was too busy reading books to be bad.”
The September chapter of this book is filled with the benefits of raising a
reader, but Truman gives us a great one to add here in May: readers very,
very seldom get into trouble. They’re too busy. They already live in a world
of high stakes—that of history, of great novels, of epic stories—why do
they need to go around creating drama and problems in the real world?
Of course, kids get in trouble for a lot of reasons, but “not having
anything better to do” is one you can solve for right now. Introduce them to
the world of books. Challenge them, incentivize them to read. Let them fall
in love with those worlds and live there as much as they want.
It’ll cause a lot less trouble for the both of you.
May 10
Remember What Success Looks Like
The Bible puts forth a pretty good definition of an actual successful life:
“An elder must be blameless, faithful to his wife, a man whose children are
trustworthy and are not open to the charge of being wild and disobedient.”
We can strip the gender out of this and it’s still true. Our job is to:
live an honorable life
treat our spouse well (and respect our marriage)
teach our children to be honest and reliable
refrain from spoiling them
If you can be successful or famous or respected at your chosen craft
above all that? Fantastic. Just remember: no amount of worldly gains will
matter—especially at the end of your life—if you have failed at being a
parent to those with whom you would most love to share those gains.
May 11
Are You the Good Guys?
That’s what the boy asks his father in Cormac McCarthy’s The Road: “Are
we still the good guys?”
It’s the boy’s sweetness, his insistence on doing the right and kind thing,
despite the darkness of the world, that keeps the father from spiraling into
despair or cruelty.
Are you the good guys? Or have you curdled along with your political
party? Have you been corrupted by your industry? Have you grown callous
and indifferent with all the responsibilities and stresses of life? Are you too
busy worrying about your mortgage and your golf game to care about other
people? Are you too far down the road to change? To question and reflect?
To see things from a new perspective?
The good news is that you have a boy like that in your own life. Your
kids are a wonderful source of innocence and purity. They see things with
fresh eyes. They are not yet jaded. They are also a kind of warrant. Why
should you change? Why should you be one of the good guys? For them.
Give them hope. Give them a model. Be one of the good guys.
May 12
What Matters More Than Results
The actress Tracee Ellis Ross has a famous, successful mother in the
multiple Grammy Award winner and Motown legend Diana Ross. You
might think that someone that successful would care a lot about success.
The driven parent drives their children—to get good grades, to win games,
to be the strongest, prettiest, or most popular, to follow in their footsteps.
Their high standards extend right down through the college their kids go to
or the profession they pursue.
But Tracee got lucky. Her mom did it right. Most parents would ask their
kids, “How are your grades?” “Did you win?” “Are you number one in your
class?” But after school, Diana Ross would ask, “Did you do your best?
How do you feel about it, Tracee?” Tracee—who, amid some fits and starts,
went on to become a very accomplished actress—would explain that her
mother’s emphasis taught her an essential perspective shift: “how to
navigate a life through how it feels to you, as opposed to how it looks to
everyone else.”
What matters more than your kids’ grades in school is the priorities they
pick up and the values they absorb. So that’s the question: Are you teaching
them that test scores matter or that learning counts? Are you teaching them
that success is winning arbitrary competitions or that it is becoming the best
version of themselves?
Results don’t matter—not the obvious ones, anyway. What counts is the
person your kids are shaping themselves into and the things you do along
the way to help them.
May 13
Ask Them This Question Every Day
Wherever there is a human being there is an opportunity for kindness.
—SENECA
We’re always asking our kids questions: How was school? How did
baseball practice go? Did you stay out of trouble? What did your teacher
say about your math grade? Did you have fun with your friends?
We ask these questions because we want to have something to talk about.
We ask these questions because we’re concerned. We ask these questions
because the answers matter to us. Our kids realize this. They are smart
enough to understand that these questions are a reflection of their parent’s
values, of how the world measures a person and determines what success
looks like.
Which is why it’s important that we go out of our way to ask questions
that reinforce what is actually important in life. That we don’t just consider
it insignificant small talk. The way Diana Ross asked Tracee Ellis Ross
about her day is a great example.
But here’s another. Instead of asking your kids if they behaved well or
performed well or even if they had fun, be sure to check in with them about
whether they did something kind. Ask them, every day: What good turn did
you do today? What was something you did for someone else? Who did you
help?
Think of the message this sends. Think of how it makes them think about
their own day—to review their own actions through the lens of empathy,
how their actions affect others. Think of the priorities it sets through your
monitoring—that their parents are on top of not how many answers they got
right but how many right things they did. Think about how much better the
world would be if everyone thought this way, if everyone was raised this
way.
May 14
Compete on This
Compete with yourself and root for everybody else.
—CANDICE MILLARD
We all find ourselves in competition with other parents. Maybe we see
how our car compares with everyone else’s at school drop-off, or we dress
up really fancy for that school fundraiser, hoping to turn heads. Very
quickly, that kind of competition can transfer to our kids: we want to make
sure they have the same gadgets as their peers; we look at what colleges
they can get into compared with their friends, and we start to push them to
be valedictorian or captain of the baseball team or president of the student
council.
This is not just a superficial competition but a stupid and possibly
destructive one (as those Varsity Blues parents serving prison sentences
should remind us), not just because it’s one we’ll inevitably lose—there will
always be someone richer, someone hotter, someone whose kids are more
naturally gifted—but because it can rub off on our kids in the worst way.
If you’re going to compete with anyone, we should tell our kids, compete
with yourself, to be the best version of yourself. Compete over things you
actually control. And make no mistake, we should take that advice
ourselves.
Compete with yourself to be more present, to be kinder, to have more fun
with your kids . . . to beat what you got from your own parents. Focus on
the stuff that’s up to you, that can be an example for your kids as they grow
into the people you want them to become.
May 15
Teach Them Empathy
One of the wonderful benefits of reading fiction, studies show, is that it
helps cultivate empathy. By reading and experiencing the interior lives of
the characters on the page, we are reminded that not everyone thinks and
acts like we do. We are reminded that not everyone has been as lucky as
we’ve been.
It also happens that fiction can teach us this empathy by way of specific
advice and admonition. Perhaps you remember this opening line from The
Great Gatsby:
In my younger and more vulnerable years my father gave me
some advice that I’ve been turning over in my mind ever since.
“Whenever you feel like criticizing anyone,” he told me, “just
remember that all the people in this world haven’t had the
advantages that you’ve had.”
We need our kids to understand this. That’s why they have to read Gatsby
and every other great novel. It’s also something we have to explicitly
remind them—the way Nick Carraway’s father did in the book. Most
important, it’s something we have to model ourselves.
May 16
What We Do Ripples Through
It is from numberless diverse acts of courage  .  .  . that human history is thus
shaped. Each time a man stands up for an ideal, or acts to improve the lot of
others, or strikes out against injustice, he sends forth a tiny ripple of hope, and
crossing each other from a million different centers of energy and daring those
ripples build a current which can sweep down the mightiest walls of oppression
and resistance.
—ROBERT F. KENNEDY
In the beautiful children’s book Each Kindness, Jacqueline Woodson tells
the story of a young girl named Chloe who, in the casual way that kids
often do, treats a classmate cruelly. She is moved to change one day when
her teacher demonstrates the way that water ripples when a stone is dropped
in it.
So it goes with kindness, the teacher explains. When we do something
nice for someone, it ripples through their lives and into the world, radiating
goodness outward. Chloe is inspired by this . . . but it’s too late. The girl she
was cruel to has moved away. Now when she throws a rock into the pond
near her house, all she can think of are the lost opportunities she had to
improve someone’s life, to make their day brighter.
This is something we must teach our kids—moreover, we must
demonstrate to our kids. By treating them well, by showing them
compassion and empathy and unconditional love, we help not only them but
everyone they encounter. We can take heart knowing that this kindness, big
and small, will ripple through their lives long after they’ve moved out,
they’ve grown up, and we’re long gone.
May 17
Teach Them to Give It Their All
Rudyard Kipling’s beautiful poem “If,” which was written as advice for
Kipling’s son, is about toughness and virtue, honor and duty. But there is
one line that doesn’t get as much attention, maybe because it’s a bit
confusing:
If you can fill the unforgiving minute
With sixty seconds’ worth of distance run
Kipling is talking about the importance of giving your all to something,
physical or otherwise. There is an expression in sports about “playing
through the whistle.” In boxing and martial arts, you punch through the
opponent until you hear the bell. In baseball, you swing through the ball. In
running, they talk about running through the finish line. It’s about
completing the action. Giving 100 percent. Playing the right way.
This is an important lesson to teach our kids. We don’t stop at the finish
line. We give our all to something. We concentrate on a single task until it’s
done or until the clock runs out. We fill that unforgiving minute.
It’s the proper way to play . . . and to live.
May 18
Teach Them to Do the Right Thing
Just that you do the right thing. The rest doesn’t matter.
—MARCUS AURELIUS
In the beautiful and hilarious novel A Man Called Ove, a young Ove is
working at the same rail yard as his father. He is cleaning a car with another
worker, Tom, when they find a briefcase left by a passenger. Instinctively,
Tom goes to steal it. Ove is surprised. A few seconds later, he finds and
picks up a wallet left by a different passenger.
Just then, Ove’s father walks in. He asks Ove what he wants to do with
the wallet. Ove suggests that they return it to the lost and found, where it is
quickly claimed by the woman who lost it. “Not many people have ever
handed in this much money,” the woman says. Well, Ove’s father replies,
“many people don’t have any decency either.” Later that evening, Ove asks
his father why he didn’t tell management about the briefcase that Tom had
stolen. His father shakes his head and replies, “We’re not the sort of people
who tell tales about what others do.”
In both instances, Ove’s father is showing his boy what decency looks
like. Decency is about what you do. It’s not a standard you hold others to.
Decency is what you do with money you find. It’s how you raise your kids.
It’s not something you wield; it’s not something you gossip about. It’s
something you embody and embrace.
May 19
Teach Them to Be Bigger
A ten-year-old Jim Lawson was walking down the street when, as he
passed a car, a small child looked at him and called him the N-word.
Stunned by the hate and the meanness of it, Lawson reached into the car
and slapped the boy in the face.
When his mother found out about this, she was understandably worried.
In the then-segregated and racist South, the actions of a young black boy
could so easily lead to something terrible and tragic at the hands of awful
and unaccountable adults. But more than that, she wanted her son not to be
defined or changed by the hate of the world around him.
“What good did that do, Jimmy?” his mother asked him. “We all love
you, Jimmy, and God loves you,” she explained, “and we all believe in you
and how good and intelligent you are. We have a good life and you are
going to have a good life. With all that love, what harm does that stupid
insult do? It’s nothing, Jimmy, it’s empty. Just ignorant words from an
ignorant child who is gone from your life the moment it was said.”
This was a life-changing exchange. It put Jim Lawson onto his world-
changing path of nonviolence. (He would organize the first sit-ins in
Nashville in the 1960s.) It helped him realize that he was above the horrible
things that other people said and did, that what mattered was what he said
and did. What mattered was responding with kindness and love. What
mattered was knowing that he was good and that he was loved and nothing
anyone else thought could change that.
Lawson’s parents gave him the gift of teaching him that he was bigger
than the small people who lived around him. That he could be the bigger
person and do bigger things. Now, here today, can you do the same for your
children?
May 20
Don’t Just Assume It Will Work Out
In Meditations, Marcus Aurelius takes a moment to remind himself of the
“malice, cunning and hypocrisy that power produces,” and the “peculiar
ruthlessness often shown by people from ‘good families.’ ”
Even though you’re well educated, and you’ve done well for your family,
and you’re not some monster, there are no guarantees that you will pass
these laudable traits down to your kids. Life is full of temptations. Bad
habits and bad influences are easy to fall prey to. Look at Marcus Aurelius’s
own children. Marcus and his wife were calm and wise  .  .  . and still,
something went wrong with his son and heir Commodus, who was
deranged and a terror for the empire—exactly as bad as Commodus in the
movie Gladiator. Or worse.
The point of this is: just because you’re successful, just because you can
pay to send your kids to the right schools, just because you showed up more
than your own parents, doesn’t mean you’re out of the woods. This is a hard
job we’ve committed to. The stakes are high. The margin for error is low.
Kids don’t just “turn out” as good people. They are made that way—
molded, guided by ancestors, taught by example, and buoyed by a
constancy of parental presence.
You must provide all of this. You cannot slack. You cannot assume it will
handle itself. They need you.
May 21
“And What Did You Do?”
In the 1920s, long before he was a poet, before he was a conscientious
objector, before he had kids of his own, William Stafford was just a kid
living in an era when bullying and racism and all sorts of cruelty existed out
in the open.
One day, young William came home and reported to his parents that two
young black kids were being taunted at school. His parents had one
question for him: “And what did you do, Billy?”
Notice that the elder Staffords didn’t dismiss what was happening as not
their kid. Nor did they rush to the phone to call his teachers. They did not
yell. They did not make assumptions. They used the incident as an
opportunity to emphasize a core life teaching: We are responsible for each
other. We cannot sit on the sidelines while bad things happen in front of us.
One can imagine they were hoping to hear an answer that revealed their
son had absorbed the lessons they’d been trying to teach in their home his
whole life. Like any good parent, their question was a test to see if he
understood how virtue and duty and kindness and human decency must be
practiced to be perfected. And one can only imagine how they felt when
they heard his reply . . .
“I went and stood by them.”
May 22
Teach Them These Three Duties
Life is vexing, especially when you’re little. As children, we constantly
find ourselves in situations for which we have no experience, for which we
have not been prepared, for which there does not seem to be a clear or
obvious answer. Some of these are big situations, like being bullied or
breaking an arm; some are small, like being nervous to go to your first
sleepover or being jealous of something you wanted that your best friend
got instead. Sometimes it’s a blessing; sometimes it’s the curse of
misfortune.
How are they supposed to respond? Well, it’s your job to show them.
Because as disparate and vexing and unique as every moment of life can be,
each of us has a set of duties that we can find guidance from in any and all
situations.
You can teach your kids that whatever they’re facing, they can respond
with:
hard work
honesty
helping others as best they can
It’s not always going to lead to success, of course, but it will always lead
to something they can be proud of. It will always serve them well. Whether
it’s a sudden reversal or a sudden bounty, whether they’re at fault or an
innocent bystander, what life demands—what we as their parents expect of
them—is work, honesty, and compassion.
May 23
It’s Better to Be Kind Than Clever
There is a story about Jeff Bezos, the founder of Amazon, from when he
was a young boy. He was with his grandparents, both of whom were
smokers. Bezos had recently heard an antismoking PSA on the radio that
explained how many minutes each cigarette takes off a person’s life span.
And so, sitting there in the back seat, like a typical precocious kid, he put
his math skills to work with this new knowledge and proudly explained to
his grandmother as she puffed away, “You’ve lost nine years of your life,
Grandma!”
The typical response to this kind of innocent cheekiness is to pat the child
on the head and tell them how smart they are. Bezos’s grandmother didn’t
do that. Instead, she quite understandably burst into tears. It was after this
exchange that Bezos’s grandfather took his grandson aside and taught him a
lesson that he says has stuck with him for the rest of his life. “Jeff,” his
grandfather said, “one day you’ll understand that it’s harder to be kind than
clever.”
Cleverness comes easily when you want attention. It takes work to be a
nice person and patience to reap its rewards. It requires extra effort to stop
and think about how what you say and do affects other people. But a truly
successful person—a truly great kid—is the result of parents who take the
time to equip them with this skill. Parents who reward them for their
kindness and compassion, not just their intelligence or their grades or their
clever tongue. Because these self-obsessed traits, if not balanced with
empathy and with kindness, can become a wicked and lonely combination.
May 24
Remember This About Most People
No intelligent man believes that anybody ever willingly errs or willingly does
base or evil deeds.
—SOCRATES
There are a lot of selfish people out there. Cruel people. Stupid people.
Even evil people. Sometimes they’re all one person. Your kids are going to
meet some of these people. Are they ready? Perhaps a better question is, are
you ready? To protect them from the worst of that sort, of course, but also
to make sure that your cynicism about the world—about people—does not
affect your children too early.
There’s a great children’s book called Most People that reminds us: Most
people are good. Most people are trying as hard as they can. Most people
will help you if they can. Most people want the same things, the book says.
Most people are happy  .  .  . and even the people who aren’t, its author
reminds us, would rather be happy if they could.
With our life experience, we might struggle to believe that is true.
Regardless, we can’t pass on the psychic burden of our own experiences
and frustrations with the people from our past. This is the difficult tension
we have to resolve as parents. We have to prepare our children for a world
that is not all sunshine and kittens. We also have to get them to understand
that the darkness in the world is not complete. In fact, it’s distinctly the
minority.
We want our kids to carry the fire, to keep the brightness alive. We want
them to seek it out in other people. And we want them to be like most
people: Good. Kind. Happy. Helpful.
It’s we who will chart that path.
May 25
Are You Teaching Them Values?
Any system of education which does not inculcate moral values simply furnishes
the intellectual equipment whereby men and women can better satisfy their pride,
greed and lust.
—HYMAN RICKOVER
It’s true, we want them to go to great schools. We want them to learn as
much as possible. This is why we monitor their grades. This is why parents
are concerned about changes in curriculum, why they save and invest in
order to pay for college.
But are we really focused on the right things? This isn’t just to make the
tried-and-true point that education must give our kids actual job skills they
can use out in the world. It’s also to question whether our kids are being
taught how to be good people—at home, in the classroom, and out in the
world.
Plenty of children go to expensive private schools or make it to the Ivy
League. Yet they end up being corrupt politicians or soulless businesspeople
who devastate industries. Plenty of children learn how to succeed but are
deprived of the skills and the decency necessary to manage this success
ethically and responsibly.
The purpose of education is not to make your kids more selfish, more
greedy, more convinced of their own ideas or superiority. No, it’s to make
them better citizens, better human beings, and hopefully, someday, better
parents themselves.
May 26
Epithets for Your Kid
One of the most interesting passages in Marcus Aurelius’s Meditations is
this one:
Epithets for yourself: Upright. Modest. Straightforward. Sane.
Cooperative. Try not to exchange for others.
These were essentially the words Marcus wanted to live by—his
principles expressed in the fewest syllables possible. What if, as a parent,
you sat down—ideally with your coparent—and fleshed out what those
words mean for each of your children too? As in, what kind of kid are you
trying to raise? What are the watchwords that you are attempting to move
them toward with the choices you make as parents?
Some obvious ones: Kind. Loyal. Moral. Honest.
And maybe some more specific ones to help them succeed in the world:
Creative. Bilingual. Hardworking. Lifelong learner.
Maybe to some parents it’s important for their kids to be athletic. For
others, that they be readers. For others still, that their kids live a life of
service. There is a lot of room here for choice and, thankfully, most of the
answers you come up with will be right. The important thing is not so much
which epithets you choose but that you have chosen at all.
For, if you don’t know what you’re aiming for, how can you expect to hit
a target? How do you know you’re not accidentally teaching them to
exchange one epithet for another? The truth is you can’t. So get writing.
May 27
The Main Thing We Have to Teach Them
Michael Schur’s fun book of moral philosophy, How to Be Perfect, ends
with a meditation on what is one of the toughest jobs for even the wisest
and best of us: how to pass the important lessons of life on to our kids.
This passage captures perfectly what those lessons are:
You are people on earth. You are not alone here, and that means
you owe the other people on earth certain things. What you owe
them, more or less, is to live by rules they wouldn’t reject as
unfair (assuming they’re decent, reasonable people).
He has a great little exercise for his kids to remember too. As you go
through life and are thinking about doing something, he says, ask if your
brother or sister would think it was a good idea. Then keep going, and ask if
a friend would think it was a good idea, or a teacher, even a kid you don’t
like but think is smart. Explaining Kant’s categorical imperative to a five-
year-old, ask, “Would it be okay if everyone did this? What would the
world be like if every single person were allowed to do whatever I’m about
to do?”
The way to raise decent and kind human beings is to teach them how
their actions affect other people, what their obligations to other people are.
You don’t have to be a philosopher to pull that off  .  .  . just a good and
decent person yourself.
May 28
It’s Usually Not an Accident
Florence Nightingale was an incredible woman. She revolutionized
nursing. She saved thousands of lives. This came as a surprise to the high
society of Victorian England, because women weren’t supposed to do
career type things, let alone something as hands-on as work in a hospital.
But anyone who looked at Florence’s family tree should not have been
surprised. She wasn’t just some saint who came from nowhere. Her great-
grandfather was a philanthropist who supported the American Revolution,
even donating large chunks of his holdings in Savannah to the cause. His
son—Florence’s grandfather—was a member of the British House of
Commons and a leading abolitionist in the UK. The fact that his daughter,
Fanny (Florence’s mother), didn’t seem to care much about the less
fortunate was the exception, not the rule, in their family.
It wasn’t an accident that Florence Nightingale was inclined to charity
and selflessness. She learned it in the fashion that all great traditions are
created—from the choices made by family. She was inspired by her
ancestors.
We can’t choose the family tree from which we spring. But as parents we
can choose who in our family tree we look to for guidance. We can, like
Florence Nightingale, pick which family members to be inspired by, whose
example to follow. As parents, we can choose which branches of the family
to tell our kids about, which stories we want to highlight and which lessons
we want to fill their heads with.
Raising great, selfless, courageous kids is not an accident. They aren’t sui
generis or ex nihilo. They come from a tradition. They come from us.
May 29
Always Think About How Other People Are Doing
Perhaps you’re familiar with the scene in the Bible where Moses—aided
by God—parts the Red Sea. It was a miracle of epic proportions that
allowed the Israelites to race through and escape the Egyptians who were
chasing them. Less known about the miracle is what happened next. When
Moses released the sea, the Egyptians were trapped. The water crashed
around them and thousands perished.
Naturally, the Israelites broke out in song and celebration. As the angels
went to join them, God rebuked them, according to the Talmud. “How dare
you sing for joy,” it was written, “when My creatures are dying.”
Whether any of these events actually occurred is beside the point—it
doesn’t change the lesson. It is easy in the midst of victory and success to
think of how wonderful this is for you. It’s also easy to forget whom you
defeated and what your victory has cost them. It’s not unlikely that they’ve
lost more than you’ve gained.
We must be careful to be good sports in this life, to be empathetic and
caring enough to realize that things are not always as great for other people
as they are for us. “Rejoice not when thine enemy falleth, and let not thine
heart be glad when he stumbleth,” the Bible says in Proverbs 24:17.
It’s these kinds of ancient and timeless lessons that we must pass along to
our children. You can still enjoy what you have, and you should still want to
win in life. But don’t be so clueless as to think that other people are not
suffering; don’t be so self-absorbed as to not care. And don’t raise children
who are indifferent to either.
May 30
You Make Debts Your Children Must Pay
Nobody wrote more beautifully about the history of conquest and
adventure than Theodore Roosevelt. Nobody wrote more poetically about
war and glory and empire than Rudyard Kipling.
In the end, though, these things left them grieving the sons they loved so
much. Roosevelt lost his son Quentin, shot down over France. Kipling lost
his son Jack in the trenches in 1915, so destroyed by “shot and shell” that
they never identified the body. Roosevelt was broken by the loss of his
eldest boy and followed him soon to the grave. Kipling, who had written
“If” to his son when he was just twelve years old, would write one of his
last poems in grief:
“Have you news of my boy Jack?”
Not this tide.
“When d’you think that he’ll come back?”
Not with this wind blowing, and this tide.
These were tragic, devastating events that no parent should ever have to
experience. But it’s also indisputable that these two great men were not
blameless in their occurrence—not only because of the pressure and
impossible expectations they put on their children but because they were
part of a generation that had encouraged, celebrated, and glibly supported
the policies that led to the carnage that claimed their sons.
It’s a cautionary tale for all parents. Our generation, just like all past
generations, makes decisions in the present that have consequences borne
primarily by future generations. Our children and grandchildren will live in
the world created by your choices  .  .  . and you yourself may live long
enough for it to break your heart.
May 31
A Theory About Life
In the 1930s, languishing in college and struggling to live up to the
expectations of his illustrious family, a young Walker Percy wrote a letter to
his uncle and adopted father, Will Percy. He probably expected to receive a
lecture about his grades in reply. Or to be admonished for letting the family
down. Or perhaps to be sent money for a tutor.
But the reply surprised him. Because there wasn’t any of that. Instead,
Will waved off those concerns, telling Walker:
My whole theory about life is that glory and accomplishment are
of far less importance than the creation of character and the
individual good life.
Isn’t that wonderful? Isn’t that exactly what every stressed, self-critical,
confused kid needs to hear about life? Who you are is more important than
what you do. I’d rather you be good than successful. Character is more
important than cash.
It can be easy to lose sight of this. We all know how competitive the
world is, and we see the potential our kids have. We don’t want them to
make the same mistakes we did. But ultimately, those things will take care
of themselves if we raise them right.
The ancients knew that character was fate, and we need to remember that
with our own kids. The good life, a life lived well, full of doing good, will
be a successful life—and a more important one too.
JUNE
DON’T NEGLECT YOURSELF
(LESSONS IN SELF-CARE)
June 1
It’s Okay to Ask for Help
Don’t be ashamed to need help. Like a soldier storming a wall, you have a
mission to accomplish. And if you’ve been wounded and you need a comrade to
pull you up? So what?
—MARCUS AURELIUS
If your kid was struggling, you’d want them to tell you, right? If they
didn’t understand something in class, you’d want them to ask the teacher. If
your neighbor needed something, you wouldn’t mind if they mentioned it.
If your spouse was overwhelmed and needed a hand, you’d expect them to
come to you.
Okay. But what about you? Are you okay? More important, are you
asking for help where you need it when you are not okay?
Remember, we have to model the behavior we want our kids to learn. So
if you refuse to ask for directions when you’re obviously lost, what does
that tell them? If you refuse to admit you don’t know something, and you
make up an answer to a question instead of looking it up with them, what
does that show them about learning and problem-solving? Why would they
be okay being vulnerable with a doctor or a therapist, with Mom and Dad, if
they have been regularly shown that this is something to be ashamed of?
But this is about more than even that. You can’t be a good parent if you’re
hurting and not getting help. You can’t be a good parent all by yourself.
None of us are islands or invincible or omniscient. To do our best, we have
to be able to learn, to rely on others, to admit mistakes, to ask for help.
Show them that it’s okay to ask for help. Be better, for them, by asking for
the help you know that you need.
June 2
The Most Important Decision You Make
The most important decision you make is to be in a good mood.
—VOLTAIRE
When you’re in a bad mood, you know what your kids are thinking? They
think it has something to do with them. They don’t understand all the
responsibility you’re shouldering. They don’t know about the coworker
whose stupidity you had to put up with all day or your boss’s short temper
and unrealistic expectations. They can’t see the stress all this stuff puts you
under. These are all complex emotional issues that are hard for a young kid
to understand, especially when the issues are outside their own lived
experience.
Our moods and choices and the examples we set are affecting our kids
always, changing how they see the world and how they see themselves.
How we are managing all this stuff makes them feel better or worse,
worthwhile or worthless, safe or vulnerable. And in the process, we are
creating a pattern for them that becomes hard not to follow—for better or
for worse.
Your kids are either suffering or benefiting from your moods and
emotions. Behave accordingly.
June 3
Transcend This Bitter Math
When you get married, you give away fifty percent of your life,” the
novelist Susan Straight was warned by her mother. “What about the other
half?” a young Susan asked hopefully. “When you have a baby, you give
away the other half,” her mother replied matter-of-factly.
Yikes.
Yes, marriage and relationships are hard. And in the past, they have been
particularly and oppressively cruel to women. For all time, having kids has
forced parents to make changes. They deprive us of sleep and money and
freedoms we used to take for granted. But does that mean we have to lose
ourselves, lose all our freedoms? Absolutely not.
We can transcend the bitter math. By working on ourselves and our
relationships. By asking for help. By refusing to give up on dreams, even as
we get older. By focusing on all the things that marriage and kids give us
too, all the experiences we’ve gained and the opportunities created.
To quit on ourselves is to quit on our kids—it’s teaching them a terrible
lesson.
June 4
Protect Your Wealth
The greatest of follies is to sacrifice health for any other kind of happiness.
—ARTHUR SCHOPENHAUER
Of course, our job is to provide for our kids. To work hard. To spend
wisely. To save judiciously. To put away some money, if not for their future,
then to have the financial wherewithal to make sure their needs are met and
our family is protected in case of emergency. But all that work on our
financial health will take us only so far if we don’t pay similar attention to
our mental health.
Wealth comes in forms other than money. Charlamagne tha God, a
bestselling author and host of the radio show The Breakfast Club, has
helped popularize the concept of mental wealth. Meaning: your sanity, your
well-being, your happiness. It’s really hard to be a good parent, to truly
provide, when you’re stretched way too thin, when you’re depressed, when
you haven’t cultivated the friendships and resources critical to maintaining
good mental health.
Just as you seek to protect your financial wealth, make sure you are
protecting your mental wealth. Don’t feel bad spending money on a
therapist. Or a book. Or even deciding to pass on that overtime opportunity
because you’re just too tired. Your sanity, your clarity, your well-being—
these things are essential. It’s not selfish to take care of them. It’s selfless.
Because your job is to be the best parent you can be. And that is going to
require a full store of mental wealth.
June 5
You Have to Take Care of Yourself Too
When I first began to write . . . I needed to use the time before they said, Mama
—and that was always around five in the morning.
—TONI MORRISON
One thing far too many parents have in common is that they are always
putting off taking care of themselves. I’ll start going to the gym once
they’re out of this sleep regression. I’ll start eating better once they’re less
picky about food. My wife and I will get our relationship back on track once
the kids move out.
This may come from a good place, but the results are good for no one.
You have to take care of yourself. Now! You think your terrible eating
habits aren’t contributing to your temper? Of course you’re grouchy—you
feel like a disgusting piece of crap! You think you’re doing your kids a
favor by shortening your life span? You think you’re modeling what a good
person looks like when you’re struggling to get up the stairs or pick up a
bag of groceries? You think you’re making them feel safe and loved by
letting your relationship bleed out on the dining room table?
You have to take care of yourself. For them. For you. Because you’ll be a
better parent if you’re healthy, happy, and wise. Don’t put this off. It’s not
selfish. It’s essential.
June 6
It Takes a Team
It’s impossible to do this all, isn’t it? We have all the tasks, responsibilities,
and aspirations we’ve always had—eating and sleeping and working and
paying our taxes and taking out the trash and following our dreams—but
now we have little people to care for on top of all that. Little helpless
people with infinite needs. How can we do it all?
Ursula Le Guin was a full-time writer. She was prolific, publishing
twenty-three novels, thirteen children’s books, twelve volumes of short
stories, eleven volumes of poetry, five essay collections, and four works of
translation. Additionally, she worked as an editor and taught college
undergraduate classes.
Oh  .  .  . she was also the mother of three and the wife of a history
professor, Charles Le Guin.
How did she do it all? How did he do it all? They didn’t.
“One person cannot do two full-time jobs,” Le Guin once explained.
“Writing is a full-time job and so is children. But two people can do three
full-time jobs. . . . That’s why I’m so strong on partnership. It can be a great
thing.”
Parenting is so hard to do alone; so hard. For too long, too many mothers
had to do it alone, were forced to sacrificed alone. But, of course, we are
stronger when we, our children’s parents, parent together. We go farther,
together. It’s one of the only ways to make the math work—not just for the
benefit of the children, but for the parents as well.
June 7
You Need to Take This Time
If one sets aside time for a business appointment, a trip to the hairdresser, a social
engagement, or a shopping expedition, that time is accepted as inviolable. But if
one says: I cannot come because that is my hour to be alone, one is considered
rude, egotistical, or strange.
—ANNE MORROW LINDBERGH
Certainly, someone always needed him for something. His wife, one of his
thirteen kids, a courtier, the pressing business of state. But for a few
minutes to an hour every day—sometimes in the morning, sometimes in the
evening—Marcus Aurelius was unreachable. The twentieth-century
American philosopher Brand Blanshard marvels at what Marcus
accomplished there in the “midnight dimness,” alone with his journal and
his thoughts. It didn’t matter where he was or what was happening; Marcus
stole the time to sit and think and write.
Do you do that? Do you take this time?
James Clear, author of the wonderful bestseller Atomic Habits, said that
since becoming a father, he has carved out “two sacred hours” in the
morning to do his writing. Sometimes he gets more, but never less. Those
two hours determine whether he has a good day or a wasted day, whether he
is productive and making progress . . . or slacking.
A few minutes or a few hours—in the morning, at night, or in the middle
of the day—this idea of sacred time is important. You have to carve it out.
You have to stick to the schedule like clockwork, protect it as you would a
doctor’s appointment or a big meeting. Of course, this isn’t the only time
you’ll need. It’s just the minimum. So make sure you give it to—or take it
for—yourself.
You’ll marvel at what you can accomplish in those few sacred minutes
that you’ve kept all to yourself.
June 8
This Is When You Are Happiest
Before his tragic death, Anthony Bourdain gave an interview where he
explained that he was “never happier than when I’m standing in the
backyard being, like, TV dad.” His life had been so exotic and glamorous
before fatherhood, filled with travel and fame and money and, of course,
delicious food. It had also been filled with struggle—addiction, depression,
loss. But there was something so normal, he said, about just having a
normal family, standing in the backyard, wearing an apron, flipping burgers.
“When I find myself doing that,” he said, “I am, like, ridiculously stupid
happy.”
It would not be long before Bourdain was found very far from that idyllic
backyard, on another trip to film another show. That depression, that
addiction, they came with him and ultimately took him very finally away
from the thing he loved the most—his family. It’s a sobering reminder to all
of us. First, to enjoy the present while we have it. Second, to remember how
little we actually need in order to be happy, how wonderful the ordinary
moments can be. Third, to understand how quickly it can all be taken away.
If you’re struggling with addiction, if you’re in that dark hole of
depression, please just know that as difficult as it is to fight, to break free
and climb out, the simple joys and tenderness and compassion you will find
in victory with those you love will come with equal ease and ridiculously
stupid happiness.
June 9
They Need Structure (and So Do You)
If a person puts even one measure of effort into following ritual and the standards
of righteousness, he will get back twice as much.
—XUNZI
If you talk to a sleep expert about sleep training your infant, they’ll tell
you: kids need structure and routine. If you talk to an educational expert
about helping your kid do better in school, they’ll tell you: structure and
routine. If you talk to a behavioral expert about helping your kid behave,
they’ll tell you: structure and routine. Hell, if you talk to a dog trainer,
they’ll tell you the same thing about your pet: structure and routine (and
exercise).
Pretty much whatever the problem or whatever the issue, structure and
routine are the solution. Which makes sense. The world is scary. So much
of it is new and overwhelming. But if you give them structure and routine,
they can relax because they have less to figure out, less to worry about.
Instead, they can explore. They can get comfortable and accept things. They
can feel safe.
But what about you? What about Mom and Dad? Do you maintain
structure and routine for yourself? You put them to bed at the same time
each night, but do you wing it after that? You plan their dinners in
advance  .  .  . but what about your lunch at work? You give them quiet
playtime in the afternoon and downtime on the weekends. But do you create
that kind of regular time for yourself? Structure and routine are essential no
matter who or how old you are. They’re important for kids and they’re
important for parents.
And guess what—when you keep a routine for yourself . . . it’s easier to
keep them on one.
June 10
You Are Capable of Change
Ted Williams was a great baseball player, but for a long time, he was a
really selfish and ruthless person. He had a horrible, abusive childhood and
struggled to find the ability to love or care about anyone.
But Williams’s story has enough hope in it to inspire even the most hard-
boiled and reluctant of fathers. Because, over time, Ted Williams started to
change. As a friend would say about him:
What’s incredible as an observer was to watch him fall in love
with his kids. . . . It was everything against his grain to succumb
to this outside influence of children. Love had control over him.
He felt vulnerable. A vulnerability he had never had in his life.
This softness started to show itself in little hints, in the oddest and yet
most personal of places. It was entries in Williams’s fishing journal, where
for the first time he began to write about the kids he had long ignored. It
was the signed poster his daughter found under piles of memorabilia after
her father’s death that just said, “To my beautiful daughter. I love you.
Dad.”
You have that kind of vulnerability now. Those same powerful forces are
gnawing at you too, hopefully, and making progress on that tough
exoskeleton you developed to protect yourself from the world. You can let
this parenthood thing change you. You can let this make you better. You can
even begin—no matter how far you are down the road, as Williams was—to
make up for mistakes you might have made early in your parenting days.
It’s never too late.
June 11
Make Sure You Make Time for Crazy
Douglas MacArthur was a man of routine—most military men are. So it
shouldn’t surprise us that, when his son, Arthur, was born, he built a family
life around routine. But unlike far too many parents who make routine a
form of control, MacArthur’s morning routine began with a moment of joy.
As William Manchester details in his book American Caesar, it was a kind
of scheduled crazy fun:
At about 7:30 A.M. the door of the General’s bedroom would open
and the boy would trudge in clutching his favorite toy.  .  .  .
MacArthur would instantly bound out of bed and snap to
attention. Then the General marched around the room in
quickstep while his son counted cadence: “Boom! Boom!
Boomity boom!” After they had passed the bed several times, the
child would cover his eyes with his hands while MacArthur
produced the day’s present: a piece of candy, perhaps, or a crayon,
or a coloring book. The ritual would end in the bathroom, where
MacArthur would shave while Arthur watched and both sang
duets.
No one is too important or too busy to have some crazy time at home. No
one is above getting pummeled by their kid in bed. No father should
hesitate before singing at the top of his lungs while he shaves. These
moments are the best moments. If they’re rare, you’re doing it wrong.
They should be regular, they should be routine.
June 12
We Are All Complicated
Naturally, we want to be perfect for our kids, in no small part because for
the first several years of their lives, to them we can do no wrong, and we
want to prove them right. But since we know we’re not perfect, inevitably
we feel guilty or inadequate when we let them down—even if they’re
unaware of it at the time. This feeling of insufficiency can be so powerful
that we are prone to hiding it or lying about it or, worse, acting like
hypocrites.
You might think it was devastating for the comedian Pete Davidson, who
lost his father on September 11, to learn that his father was far from perfect.
His parents’ marriage had not been great (which is why they were separated
and divorced not long before that tragic day). His father had done drugs and
gotten into trouble more than once in his adult life. As Pete grew older and
discovered more and more about his heroic father, who died saving people
in the collapse of the Twin Towers, he wasn’t disappointed, he was
heartened.
These failings and foibles humanized his father in a way that the stories
his friends and family told the then seven-year-old Pete about his dad never
could. “It made me realize that he had his own issues,” Pete explained to
Judd Apatow in Sicker in the Head. “He had problems just like everybody
else. But it also made me realize that even with all that, his morals were still
intact, and none of that prevented him from being a hero.”
No one is perfect, least of all you. We are all complicated. We are all
works in progress (emphasis, though, on progress). You don’t need to hide
it. You don’t need to feel guilty. It won’t prevent you from being great at
this most important job . . . nor from being a hero if the moment calls for it.
June 13
Try Not to Give Them Anything Extra
We all have issues. We know that. Our goal as parents is to not pass them
on. To stop the cycle of dysfunction. To not let the demons we wrestle with
find softer targets in our children.
But even more than that, we can’t let our demons invite new ones to the
party. As best we can, we must not inflict more damage or create more
issues. This Philip Larkin poem expresses this tendency so perfectly:
They fuck you up, your mum and dad.
They may not mean to, but they do.
Worse, he says, is that they give us not just their own faults but some
extra ones too.
The Buddhists speak of samsara, the way that suffering transfers from
generation to generation. Why is that? Why is it that suffering rarely ever
fully discharges from a generation, leaving the next one free to flourish
unhindered? It’s because we don’t do the work. It’s because sometimes we
are not even aware of our own suffering. And when we are, and we still
don’t do the work, it’s often because we tell ourselves we’re helpless.
Look, we are going to screw up. It’s inevitable. We are imperfect people.
It’s impossible that we’ll raise perfect kids. Still, that doesn’t mean we’re
helpless against the demons knocking at our door. We can work on
ourselves. We can go to therapy so maybe they won’t have to. We can try to
be healthy so they’ll grow up thinking that’s normal. We can try to move on
from our own anger and frustration and pain so that, at the very least, they
do not inherit our burdens.
June 14
Keep Your Head Up and Take Another Swing
And now that you don’t have to be perfect, you can be good.
—JOHN STEINBECK
No person has a perfect track record. Certainly no parent does. We all
mess up. We all fall short. We make mistakes. We lose our temper and our
patience. We handle certain situations in ways we wish we hadn’t.
Is there anything worse than that feeling? Knowing that you screwed up?
That you might have hurt them?
Shane Parrish, creator of the wildly popular Farnam Street blog,
explained:
I remember calling my late mom one night, exhausted and feeling
overwhelmed. I had lost my cool on the kids. She gave me a piece
of advice that stuck with me, “If you don’t learn to let go of your
mistakes today, they’ll compound tomorrow. Get some sleep and
start again tomorrow.” I still remember that when I have bad
parenting days. Tomorrow I’ve got to get up and start all over.
You can’t go back and undo what you did yesterday. You can’t erase from
their memories that time you lost your cool or that time you said those
regrettable things. But what you can do is make this just one memory
among many greater, more positive ones. What you can do is show them
that this one moment isn’t who you are. You can strive to get better.
Keep your head up. Step up. Try again tomorrow.
June 15
This Is the Secret
When you look at successful people with kids, it can be easy to marvel at
all they’ve accomplished: How do they do it? How do they get it all done?
Fortunately, there is an answer, and it’s definitely not magic: They have
help. They have nannies and tutors and house managers. They have chiefs
of staff. They have personal assistants. They have personal trainers. That’s
how they get it all done. If you could afford it, you’d be just as efficient and
seemingly carefree as them.
Now, the point of explaining this is not to make you jealous or to point
out the inequities of our society. In fact, it’s the opposite: it’s to nudge you
into following in their footsteps. Of course, hiring a full-time staff is beyond
most of our capabilities, but surely there are things you are doing that you
don’t have to do, that you could afford to pay someone to do for you. And
yet you continue to do them . . . Why? Because your dad changed the oil in
his car? Because your mom always served home-cooked meals? Because
you feel guilty outsourcing this or that?
C’mon. Forget the gender roles. Forget “the way things used to be.” The
way things used to be almost invariably involved parents spending way less
time with their kids than we do now.
Take a minute today and calculate what an hour of your time is worth.
Think about how much more present you could be for your kids if there
were less on your plate. You don’t have to outsource everything, hire help
for everything, but you don’t have to do everything yourself either.
Get help.
June 16
Do as You Say
It was on an ordinary day that Jimmy Carter’s father pulled his son aside
for a conversation. “Jimmy,” he said (and he never called his son Jimmy),
“I need to talk to you about something important.” “Yes, sir, Daddy,”
Jimmy replied. “There is something I want you to promise me,” his father
continued. “I don’t want you to smoke a cigarette until you are twenty-one
years old.”
This was the late 1930s, when something like 40 percent of the
population smoked and cigarettes could still be marketed to children with
advertisements that made claims like “More doctors smoke Camels than
any other cigarette!” Carter’s dad himself was hopelessly hooked too. “I
won’t,” Jimmy promised. And then his father sweetened the deal: “When
the time comes, I’ll give you a gold watch.”
When he was twenty-one years old, then in the Naval Academy, young
Jimmy Carter finally tried smoking. By then, it was too late. He’d missed
his window and he hated it. He never smoked another. Tragically, Carter’s
mother and three of his siblings followed in his father’s footsteps. Each one
of them died of pancreatic cancer. Carter, as of this writing, is still alive at
age ninety-eight.
When it comes to the important things with lifelong implications, you
have to make them promise, as Carter’s father did. But you also have to
learn from his failure and lead by example. The costs of not doing it could
be everything.
June 17
Find Your People
Keep company only with people who uplift you, whose presence calls forth your
best.
—EPICTETUS
Michael Chabon was worried about his son, as all fathers worry. His son
seemed lonely, seemed uninterested in the things his peers liked. Then one
day, they found themselves at some type of fashion industry event as part of
Chabon’s work. And his son was fascinated.
These creative and artistic people were so unlike the parents of his
friends or the kids at his school. He came alive with a kind of infectious
excitement that was reciprocated kindly by the other attendees. After the
event, Chabon looked at his son, who seemed suddenly possessed of a
confidence and purpose he didn’t have before. “You were with your
people,” Chabon said to him. “You found them.” His son nodded. With both
pride and understanding, all Chabon could say was, “That’s good. You’re
early.”
We need to help our kids find “their people,” but nothing would benefit
us more than doing the same. The ancient proverb is: “If you dwell with a
lame man, you will learn how to limp.” We become like the people we
spend the most time with. The random people you went to school with or
met through work or your kid’s friend’s parents? Don’t settle!
Find your people. Lean on their support. Let them make you a better
parent.
June 18
All That Matters Is This
Flea, one of the greatest musicians of all time, was a longtime dabbler in
drugs and alcohol. Unlike his Red Hot Chili Peppers bandmates, Flea never
got fully strung out. Drugs never blew up his life or turned him into a
zombie. He knew it wasn’t healthy, but he told himself he was managing
the habit successfully—never taking drugs around his kids or blowing
opportunities because of them. So why did he suddenly get sober?
He explained it in an interview with the comedian and podcaster Marc
Maron:
I remember having a talk with someone once . . . about being a
dad, and my daughter was about four years old or something. And
I would get high when I was away from her or whatever, and say,
“Oh, I don’t do it when I’m around her.” And they said, like, “All
that matters as a parent is to be present for your kid and be
communicative. And you have to be communicating with them
when you’re not around them.” You have to be—it’s like being in
a state where you’re always there for them. Like your spirit is
always available whenever they need you. And that really
resonated with me. And I love my kids so much and I was just
like, “That’s it, I gotta be there.”
Presence, being there, is the key to parenting. And what are drugs and
addiction and unaddressed issues in our lives but means of not being there.
Which is why we have to sober up and deal with our demons, because even
if they don’t feel like they are actively manifesting themselves at home,
they are. They are taking us away from our kids. They are putting us in a
position to not be there for them when they need us (and they will need us).
That kind of self-inflicted disconnection is unacceptable.
June 19
You Must Find the Stillness
All profound things, and emotions of things are preceded and attended by
Silence. . . . Silence is the general consecration of the universe.
—HERMAN MELVILLE
This change we’ve made, this decision to become a parent—it has
uprooted everything. It’s like we were hit, suddenly, by a cross-fire
hurricane. The house is a mess. The schedule is grueling. There is never
enough sleep, never enough time in the day.
Even the cool, quiet dark is pierced by the shriek of a man who has
stepped on a pile of LEGOs . . . and the shriek is coming from your mouth.
Yet to be good at our jobs, to be good at this parenting thing, we must
endeavor to find stillness. Because we need time to reflect, to focus, to find
the calm that will restore and reboot us.
Where will we find it? It won’t be in those measly two weeks of vacation
or by cutting and running and fleeing. No, we must find the stillness within
the chaos. It might not feel like these moments of quiet can exist with all
the crying babies or arguing teenagers, but they can.
If we just look within. We can find stillness, if we take advantage of the
early morning before the house is awake or those precious minutes after the
kids are in bed. But we really have to drink those moments in to get the
most from them. We can’t defer these chances in favor of our phones or
Netflix. We must take time with a journal. We must enjoy that cute but
preposterously slow walk from school to the car or from the car back into
the house. Soak up the quiet. Store these moments in your soul so you can
have them always.
Find the stillness. So much depends on it.
June 20
Access the Child in You
The darkness of World War II raged around him. He was an old man with
a million important concerns. He had power and success. He had seen it all.
But in 1944, when Winston Churchill came across a young soldier at 10
Downing Street assembling a toy train for Churchill’s grandson, he was
transfixed.
As Erik Larson describes it in his fascinating book The Splendid and the
Vile, the soldier stopped to salute the prime minister. Churchill waved it
away and simply stood watching. After the soldier had finished, Churchill
asked him to see if it worked, and together they watched the train go around
the track. “I see you have two engines,” he said. “Put the other one on the
track as well.” The soldier did as he was instructed, and then Churchill—
leader of the British empire, the man who had stared down Hitler and pulled
his country back from the brink—got down on his hands and knees with a
grin and said, “Now, let’s have a crash!”
One of the wonderful things about having kids (and grandkids) is that
they allow us to access that childlike part of ourselves that never fully goes
away. They give us an excuse to get down on the floor and crash two trains
together. To build something cool with LEGOs. To dress up for Halloween.
To be silly at a tea party. To listen to the music of our youth, to watch the
movies we loved.
It’s more than a fun excuse—it’s an important part of life. Don’t forget to
access that joy and fun . . . and maybe, you know, invite your kids to join
you in it.
June 21
It’s Good That You Worry About This
One great thing about having kids is that they force you into an active practice of
love whether you are ready for it or not.
—MICHAEL IAN BLACK
The question hits you in a soft place. It hits you when you least expect
it . . . and yet it’s there constantly. Am I a good parent? Am I screwing this
up?
Your own parents will try to reassure you. “Every parent thinks this,”
they’ll say. Except that’s not true. There are, in fact, two types of parents
who never think that. There are parents who are so convinced that they’re
the center of the universe that they never question themselves, never
wonder what they’re doing wrong. Then there are the parents who don’t
even care enough to ask. Although they are very different, in the end, these
two types are the same: they’re not good parents.
But you? The type who is always checking in and wondering, Am I doing
enough? Who actually cares about whether you’re doing a good job? You
are—by definition—a good parent, because you are thinking about your
kids first, not yourself. It’s proof that you care, that you have self-
awareness, that you’re always trying to improve. That you would stop to
evaluate your own performance, that it would bother you to give anything
less than the full measure of your devotion, is all the evidence you need to
reach a positive conclusion.
So if you feel that negative thought—that doubt—come up today, be
reassured. It means you’re putting them first. It means you’re doing a good
job.
June 22
Just Go to Bed
Sleep is the interest we have to pay on the capital which is called in at death. The
higher the interest rate and the more regularly it is paid, the further the date of
redemption is postponed.
—ARTHUR SCHOPENHAUER
You know your kids are a mess when they don’t sleep. That’s why you
follow the bedtime ritual religiously. You know that kids get into trouble at
night, if left to their own devices. That’s why your teenager has a curfew
that you enforce with an iron fist.
And yet here you are, up late again, mindlessly watching TV. Here you
are, tired in the morning—again—because you were up late on your phone.
You could have gone to bed, you knew you should have gone to bed, but
you didn’t.
Who suffers? Your kids do. Because you’re grouchy. Because you don’t
have energy. Because you’re behind. Because maybe they even sense that
you’re a hypocrite!
If you want to be a better parent, start going to bed earlier. Give yourself
a bedtime that you honor and respect and enforce. Value sleep. Take care of
yourself. Everyone in your life will benefit.
June 23
Patience Is Strength
Parenting, like exercise, is a process of growth through pain, through
struggle against resistance. It would be wonderful if raising kids were easy,
if it demanded little of you, but that’s just not how it works.
We’ve been sleep-deprived. We’ve worried. We’ve been bitten and
kicked. We’ve been judged. We’ve been leaned on and then taken for
granted, kept up late by infants and then by missed curfews. We’ve been
blamed and bothered and bludgeoned by and for their wants and needs. It is
a gauntlet in a crucible through a minefield with no trophy at the end. And
yet here we are. By necessity we have become capable of things we never
could have conceived of for ourselves before.
It was Leonardo da Vinci who said that patience was bitter but its fruit
was sweet. This holds true for many of the virtues that parenting has
demanded we embody. We’ve been patient, we’ve been resilient, we’ve
been brave, we’ve been selfless, self-effacing, steadfast, and silent . . . none
of which were particularly fun at the time.
But the result was that we grew stronger for it. Our families survived and
thrived because of it. They are where they are right now because of how far
we’ve come as parents. There is no trophy on the other side of the parenting
minefield, but there is a happy, healthy, bonded family. And that prize is the
sweetest of them all.
June 24
Just Pick Yourself Back Up
Maybe lately you haven’t been as good a parent as you would like to be.
You were on your phone too much. You let your short temper get the best of
you. You prioritized work over family. You got too wrapped up in your
expectations, you were too harsh, you refused to see things their way.
Well? That’s all in the past. It happened. It shouldn’t have, but it did. And
there’s nothing you can do now to undo it. The question is, now what? We
have the power, at any moment, to get back on track. We can choose,
always, to return to the standard we want to live up to as parents.
It’s like with a diet. You can slip a little, then a little more, then the next
thing you know, you’ve eaten a whole sleeve of Oreos. Okay. It happened.
But tomorrow hasn’t yet. You have a choice. Will you do better? Will you
do what you know is right? Will you follow the plan you set out for
yourself before the Oreo debacle?
No parent has time to indulge in pity parties. Nor can any parent justify a
continued slide. We screw up. We fall short. We’re not what we want to be
—what we promised ourselves we’d be, what we owe to our kids. And? We
can choose right now to get back on track. We can choose right now to do
better.
June 25
You Would Tell Them This. So Tell Yourself Too.
But I couldn’t speak my dream without a caveat. “I don’t know,” I said, “by the
time I finish school I’ll be fifty.” He smiled at me. “You’re going to be fifty
anyhow,” he said.
—DR. EDITH EGER
It’s hard to imagine any situation that you would describe to your kid as
hopeless. “Sorry, it’s too late, you’re a failure” is something no parent
would ever say. If they were falling behind their peers in math, you’d tell
them that it was just a matter of work and time. If they were trying to write
themselves off as a baseball player, you’d tell them about how many
athletes were late bloomers, that they are still so young, that next year they
can come back stronger and better, that they can turn things around. Even if
they had a cancer diagnosis with terrible odds, you’d be encouraging them
to fight, to never give up, to prove the doubters wrong.
You wouldn’t just be saying this. You’d mean it. Because it’s true.
Nothing is fixed in this life that you haven’t fixed yourself. Nothing is
permanent. Especially when the person, deep down, is good and decent and
full of potential.
Okay. So why are you whispering the exact opposite of this to yourself?
Telling yourself that you’ve just got to accept that your dreams are done.
Telling yourself, I used to be in good shape—but that’s in the past.
No! It’s never too late. You still have so much time in front of you. So
much ability, so much potential to fulfill. You decide the rest of the story.
It’s up to you. But this is the important part: the story you decide for
yourself is also going to determine what kind of stories your kids believe.
Your story is the compass and the map on the journey that will lead them to
realism, optimism, skepticism, cynicism, or fatalism.
Which will it be?
June 26
You Have to Face Your Flaws
Each of us picked things up in childhood. We all have issues. We have
baggage. We have flaws. The decision to have kids means we have to face
those flaws. As Jessica Lahey, the wonderful author of The Gift of Failure
(a great book for parents and teachers), said when asked about what she’s
learned being a mother:
Having to face the flaws I thought I could keep secret and buried
from the world because I wanted to be better for this new
person . . . The flaws in me I’ve been so good at hiding through
excelling academically or being charismatic start to poke through
because it matters to someone other than me. For me, those flaws
are defensiveness around my potential flaws (go figure), my
tendency to disconnect and be distracted from whatever is
happening right in front of me in favor of whatever is next, and
notably, substance abuse. If I’d never had children, I probably
could have kept that stuff buried, but parenthood demanded that I
deal with it . . . in order to model a healthy, loving, productive
humanity to my kids.
If you want to be a great parent, you’re going to have to deal with your
crap. You can’t carry baggage—it’s too dangerous with a kid around. You
risk dropping it on them. There can be no more hiding, no more deferring.
The bill is due and you have to pay it: in therapy, in conversations with your
spouse, in the pages of your journal. You have to face your flaws. Because
there are little people who did not choose to be stuck in the same house with
you and should not have to be trapped with a monster or a brick wall for a
parent.
June 27
Don’t Get Sick
If you want to find something mean on the internet, you’re going to find it.
—JUDD APATOW
There’s a great term floating out there in the culture that describes what
happens when we spend too much time on our phone. Whether it’s an adult
doomscrolling or a kid going down a YouTube unboxing rabbit hole, when
you spend too much time staring at a device, you get screensick.
You know, that insane reaction your kids have when you suddenly turn
off the TV. Their catatonic state when they’re locked into some video game,
when the walls could be falling down around them and they wouldn’t even
blink. The fantasy world your teenager comes to mistake for reality after
too many hours on the computer in their room. And you? You know the
symptoms: You’re grouchy and hate humanity after seeing too much of its
underbelly on social media. You can’t pay attention to anything but your
email. The phantom vibrations of the phone haunt you like a ghost.
The good news is it seems like a pretty easy illness to cure. A phone-free
day can cure it. Going outside for a couple hours can refocus your mind and
reset your spirit. The bad news is, the people who made your phone and
everything that goes on it know there’s an easy fix too. Which is why
they’ve spent so much time and energy and money engineering ways to
keep you connected to it, addicted to it, beholden to it. You have to fight
that.
You can’t let the technology use you; you always have to be the one
using the technology. It’s the only way to have a healthy relationship with
your phone and to avoid the screensickness that infects us.
June 28
Delight in Attending to Your Improvement
It’s a sad sight when you see a dad who has clearly stopped trying. He puts
on weight. He checks out of his marriage. Maybe he starts drinking more.
He resigns himself to the fact that he hates his job. He accepts whatever
grades his kids bring home from school. He makes their behavior somebody
else’s problem.
We see that dad and we think, I never want to be that guy.
Good. Okay. But what steps are you taking to make sure you don’t? In
the start-up world, they say that if your company isn’t growing, it’s dying.
In a way, it’s sort of true for people too. If you’re not actively developing
yourself, what’s happening? You’re atrophying. You’re getting worse.
Entropy is winning.
Epictetus liked to quote Socrates, who said that he delighted in attending
to his own improvement day to day. Brilliant. It’s the perfect thing for you
to think about. How are you improving yourself day to day? Are you
working out? Are you reading? Are you setting goals for yourself? Are you
clocking in at home as well as at the office?
Your kids will be better served by a parent who’s getting better. More
important, they will be inspired by your example. Show them that you’re
trying—that we can never stop trying—and they’ll follow you in their own
way.
June 29
It’s Not Over for You
Susan Straight was helping her mother move when she found an old
painting thrown in the trash can. Sensing that this wasn’t something that her
mother had bought, she asked her about it. “I took a painting class at the
YMCA,” Straight recalled her mother explaining. “Then I found a book—
teach yourself to paint.” Straight recalls: “My mother was an artist. She
made beautiful sketches of our garden and our house in Switzerland.”
Surprised and moved, they began to talk about the painting. Was this a
secret hobby that Susan hadn’t known about? Did her mother have a
creative side she never shared? Were there other paintings? Sadly, no. “Just
after I finished this,” her mom stated matter-of-factly, “I had you, and then I
never painted anything again. My life was over.”
Ouch.
Yet there is a part of us that understands this sentiment, right? A part of
us that felt, when our house was suddenly flooded with babies and diapers
and our routines were disrupted by carpools and soccer practices, like life
was over. Or at least the fun, free, good life. No more time for hobbies. No
energy for self-exploration, let alone self-actualization.
Certainly, we have been taxed and burdened in a way we never expected.
But we can’t throw in the towel. We can’t use being a parent as an excuse.
On the contrary, because our kids are watching us, we have to keep pushing
ourselves. We have to transcend the bitter math. We have to keep growing.
We can’t give up on ourselves or our interests.
Our lives are not over. Not even close. In a way they’re just beginning.
Beginning anew.
June 30
Here’s How You Can Help Other Parents
There is the professional you and the parental you. It makes sense that we
try to keep these things pretty distinct and separate. We even have a name
for this distinction. We call it “boundaries” or “work-life balance.” And it’s
good that we try to leave our work at the office when we head home.
But one way we can help other parents—or prospective parents—is by
making sure that we don’t leave our kids at home . . . figuratively, anyway.
By talking about our kids, by putting pictures of them up on our walls, by
being honest and up front about trying to balance our careers and family, we
are all helping each other.
For too long, parents have had to struggle in silence. They’ve been
overwhelmed or burned out. They’ve wrestled with priorities. They’ve
worried, they’ve hurt, they’ve wondered what the hell they were going to
do. They’ve done all this alone even as the person in the office next to them
was going through the same hell, even as the boss was wondering the exact
same thing about their kids.
We can all help each other if we end this charade. We can help the
parents we work with by creating an environment that’s open and safe, that
allows us to stop pretending that we aren’t all trying to work two jobs at the
same time, and to work them well.
JULY
HELP THEM BECOME WHO THEY ARE
(LESSONS IN NURTURING AND DISCOVERY)
July 1
Is It Nature or Nurture?
Plutarch tells the story of how Lycurgus reformed Spartan society from
rebellious, rowdy, and soft to self-disciplined, temperate, and courageous.
He bred two dogs from the same litter, then raised one in the home and one
out in the hunting fields. When they were fully acclimated, Lycurgus
brought both dogs to a public assembly. He set down the house dog’s food
then the hunting dog’s. Before he released the dogs, he let loose a hare. The
house dog went to his food. The hunting dog went after the hare.
“You see, fellow citizens,” Lycurgus said, “these dogs belong to the same
stock, but by virtue of the discipline to which they have been subjected,
they have turned out utterly different from each other, and you also see that
training is more effective than nature for good.”
After his demonstration proved that nurture trumped nature, Lycurgus
said, “So also in our case, fellow citizens, noble birth, so admired of the
multitude, and our being descended from Heracles does not bestow any
advantage, unless we do the sort of things for which he was manifestly the
most glorious and most noble of all mankind, and unless we practice and
learn what is good our whole life long.”
And so it goes with your own family. If we want great kids, then we have
to do the work. We have to nurture the traits we want them to have, correct
the ones we don’t.
July 2
Help Them Become Who They Are
A lot of parents will do anything for their kids, except let them be themselves.
—BANKSY
In his autobiography, Bruce Springsteen takes us back to when he was
seven years old and he watched the rock star Elvis Presley’s appearance on
The Ed Sullivan Show:
I sat there transfixed in front of the television set, my mind on
fire. I had the same two arms, two legs, two eyes; I looked
hideous but I’d figure that part out. . . . So what was missing?
THE GUITAR! The next day I convinced my mom to take me to
Diehl’s Music on South Street in Freehold. There, with no money
to spend, we rented a guitar.
Our job as parents is not to mold our children into our successors or into
superstars. It’s to help them be what they are meant to become. We expose
them to things, we let them find what interests them, and then we support
those interests. We shouldn’t pressure; we shouldn’t criticize. We should
believe in them, cheer for them, be proud of them . . . and be ready to catch
them if they fall or fail on the path to becoming who they are meant to be.
July 3
You Have to Help Them Discover This
Almost every talented and successful person can remember their
introduction to whatever it was that became their thing. In Mastery, Robert
Greene explores countless examples of this beautiful process by which
some of the world’s most notable experts discovered their “life’s task.” He
talks about Martha Graham’s first time watching a dance performance, for
example, and he tells the story of the compass that Albert Einstein’s father
gave him as a present when he was five years old:
Instantly, the boy was transfixed by the needle, which changed
direction as the compass moved about. The idea that there was
some kind of magnetic force that operated on this needle,
invisible to the eyes, touched him to the core.
At the core of most of these stories are a few key ingredients: Luck.
Openness. Curiosity. And, of course, often a parent who actively exposed
their kid to different things.
It’s your child’s job to figure out what they want to do in life. No parent
can or should make their child master anything. But it is your job,
especially when they’re young, to open their eyes, to introduce serendipity
into the equation, to expose them to all the possibilities that life has to offer.
Show them what’s out there. Help them discover.
July 4
Don’t Tie Down Your Eagle
When a young Florence Nightingale began making moves toward
volunteering in hospitals, her aristocratic parents were horrified. It had been
difficult enough raising a precocious child. Now she wanted to debase
herself with work below her station? They were embarrassed. What would
their friends think? How would it look? Like a lot of parents with
determined, independent children, they felt rejected. They thought her
choices rebuked theirs.
“We are ducks who have hatched a wild swan,” her mother once
lamented. But a biographer responded perfectly: “It was not a swan they
had hatched: in the famous phrase of Lytton Strachey’s essays—it was an
eagle.”
You can’t hold your children back. You can’t resent that they’re different.
You can’t hold them back with antiquated notions about gender or class.
Their choices say nothing about your choices. They are their own people.
They deserve their own lives. They deserve your support and
encouragement in whatever direction that takes you or them.
That’s what we’re here for. We can’t forget it.
July 5
Ask If They’d Like to Learn
Arthur Ashe became a brilliant tennis player and an ardent civil rights
activist because of a question. He was seven years old and sitting in a park
in Richmond, Virginia, watching an accomplished black tennis player
named Ron Charity practice. Ashe’s father was a park supervisor and often
left his son to entertain himself while he worked. After about an hour, Ron
Charity took a break and walked over to the boy. “Would you like to learn
how to play?” he said kindly. With that simple, generous question, Ashe and
the game of tennis were changed forever.
“As casually as that,” Ashe reflected, “my life was transformed.” How
many lives have been changed in similar ways? Because an adult took the
time to notice the interest of a child, had the patience to introduce them to
something, was willing to teach them a skill or a trade?
Of course, we cannot rely solely on the kindness of strangers. It’s our job
as parents to take the time to do this for our kids. We have to cultivate that
flicker of curiosity into full-blown love affairs, we have to channel their
energy into productive pursuits. We have to teach them stuff.
Especially the things they’re too afraid to ask about, or don’t even know
to ask about. Often, that is where the magic resides.
July 6
You Have to Do This. We Need It.
I think that the major obligation of parents and educators is to give children an
understanding of the divine beginning that exists within them.
—WILLIAM ELLERY CHANNING
Cormac McCarthy talks about “carrying the fire” in his haunting novel
The Road, which he wrote for his son. Alanis Morissette put her own spin
on it in her beautiful song “Ablaze,” which she wrote for her two children.
“To my girl, all your innocence and fire,” she sings, “my mission is to
keep the light in your eyes ablaze.” And to her son, whom she calls a
precious gentle warrior, with all his wild energy, she sings the same thing.
Our job is to keep our kids the way they were born, which as The Road
was written to show us, means fundamentally good. Innocent. Pure.
We have to help them carry the fire. We have to keep that light in their
eyes ablaze. No matter how dark the world gets. In fact, we have to do it
now, more than ever, because the world is dark. That’s our job. That’s our
warrant.
If we fail . . . God help us.
July 7
Your Kids Will Be Whatever You Make Them
The Holocaust survivor–turned–psychologist–and–author Dr. Edith Eger
had a son who was born with athetoid cerebral palsy. One day, on a visit to
the doctor’s office, Dr. Eger expressed some of her fears and worries to the
specialist. It was there that she got some advice that is worth sharing with
every parent, whether your family ever has to face that kind of adversity or
not.
“You son will be whatever you make of him,” the doctor explained.
“John’s going to do everything everyone else does, but it’s going to take
him longer to get there. You can push him too hard, and that will backfire,
but it will also be a mistake not to push him hard enough. You need to push
him to the level of his potential.”
Your kids will be whatever you make them. No one is saying that things
won’t be hard. No one is saying that any of this is fair—dyslexia or
disabilities, being a refugee or losing your job, being a genius or being
short. What matters is how we push them (and ourselves). What matters is
the kindness and the love and the patience that accompany that pushing.
We can’t do everything for them, but we can believe in them and help
them believe in themselves. We can help them reach the level of their
potential. We can make them be what they are capable of.
July 8
But Which Parts of Them Will You Nurture?
What the circumstances of your upbringing were make a significant difference in
how well you do in the world.
—MALCOLM GLADWELL
Here’s an interesting idea, perhaps not totally supported by science but
true enough to jibe with experience: We contain within us, at birth or by an
early age, all the virtues and vices we will have in our lives. All our
strengths and weaknesses are there, more or less, from the beginning. The
question for a parent, then, and for educators and mentors, is: Which of
those strengths and virtues will you nourish? Which vices will you allow to
fester?
In her beautiful novel Memoirs of Hadrian, Marguerite Yourcenar has
Hadrian pour his heart out to young Marcus Aurelius, his adopted grandson.
He explains, “I was at 20 much what I am today, but not consistently so.
Not everything in me was bad, but it could have been: the good or the better
parts also lent strength to the worse.”
We all have good traits and bad traits. What matters, then, what your job
is as a parent, is to help your kids nurture their good parts and give them the
strength to challenge their bad parts. We need to help them become who
they can be. We need to help them be consistent—consistently the best
version of themselves.
July 9
Don’t Let Them Wish to Not Be Who They Are
One of the more vulnerable moments of Pete Buttigieg’s pioneering
campaign for president (as a front-running, openly gay man) came in South
Carolina when he talked about how he struggled with his identity, with his
sexuality:
When I was younger, I would have done anything to not be gay.
When I began to halfway realize what it meant that I felt the way
I did about people . . . it launched in me something I can only
describe as a kind of war. And if that war had been settled on the
terms I would have wished for . . . I would not be standing here. If
you had offered me a pill to make me straight, I would have
swallowed it before you had time to give me a sip of water. It’s a
hard thing to think about now. It’s hard to face the truth that there
were times in my life when, if you had shown me exactly what it
was inside me that made me gay, I would have cut it out with a
knife.
No parent ever wants to hear that their kid would like to cut a part of
themselves out, that their son or their daughter is at war with themselves. Of
course, much of the shame and doubt that Pete felt had nothing to do with
his parents and everything to do with the time and culture he was growing
up in, but nevertheless.
It’s your job to make sure your kids know that there isn’t a part of them
that you’d want them to change if they could. It’s your job to show them
that you love the whole them. Through your words, your actions, and your
choices, you must teach and prove to them that they make the world better
just by being in it and by being themselves.
July 10
Work with Them to Find Their Lane
As we bring up our children, we have to remember that we are caretakers of the
future. By improving their education, we improve the future of mankind, the
future of this world.
—IMMANUEL KANT
John Adams’s father wanted nothing but for his son to go to college. John
Adams wanted to do anything but go to school. He often skipped class to go
fishing or hunting or to fly his kite. He didn’t like his teachers. He didn’t
think he was learning anything useful. He had no interest in furthering his
education.
So when he declared that he wanted to be a farmer, his father took him
down to the salt marsh to cut thatch and wade through muck, showing him
what that work would actually be like. The next day, John went back to
school, though soon enough he was struggling again. “I don’t like my
schoolmaster,” he told his father. “He is so negligent and cross that I can
never learn anything under him.” The next day, Adams’s father enrolled
him in the private school down the road. There, under a schoolmaster
named Joseph Marsh, Adams made a dramatic turn. He was studying. He
was reading. And in less than a year, the fifteen-year-old was pronounced
“fitted for college.” The following fall, he was enrolled at Harvard.
Our job as parents is to put our kids in environments in which they can
thrive and blossom. Our job is to work with them to find their lane. That
environment may not be the first school we drop them into. It might take
several tries and a fair amount of experimentation. It will definitely take
patience. That doesn’t matter.
What matters is that we help them realize who they are meant to be.
July 11
Let Them Decide
If I had one wish for my children, it would be that each of you would dare to do
the things . . . that have meaning for you as individuals . . . but not worrying if
you don’t please everyone.
—LILLIAN CARTER
When Will Ferrell was in middle school, he qualified for the gifted and
talented after-school enrichment program, so his mom signed him up. When
Will found out, he told her there was a conflict—he had signed himself up
for square dancing. He could only do one or the other.
To a parent, there is an obvious choice. It’s not even a discussion. We
know which one will teach more, which one will be better for career
prospects, which one is “cooler.” But our kids, they don’t know anything
about decision-making. They don’t know about mental models. They don’t
know about long-term consequences or second-order thinking. They don’t
know about weighing pros and cons. They don’t know what’s best for them.
They know only what they like, what excites them, what they want right
now.
But as actress and fellow SNL cast member Ana Gasteyer tells the story,
Will’s mom put all that aside. She looked at her son and said, “It’s up to
you. You decide.” Will chose square dancing. “And that, to me,” Gasteyer
said, “sums up why Will is the amazing Will Ferrell.” It explained, in her
mind, how Will Ferrell became one of the greatest comedic actors of all
time. His parents had encouraged and allowed him to. They didn’t intrude
with their “real-world” priorities—they let him follow his heart.
When your kids feel a pull toward something creative or fulfilling, the
worst thing you can do as a parent is prevent them from going in that
direction. Your job, it’s worth repeating whenever there’s a chance, is to
encourage them to be who they are, to follow their natural inclinations, to
decide what they want to do after school.
July 12
Don’t Judge Them Too Harshly . . . or Quickly
In the spring of 1921, a young ballplayer named Louis Gehrig had a tryout
for the great John McGraw at the Polo Grounds. McGraw was the manager
of the New York Giants and one of the greatest evaluators of talent in the
history of the game.
It was a good tryout. Gehrig hit a few deep shots. He was lively and
quick. He was already showing off his almost inhumanly large lower body,
which was key to power at the plate. But then Gehrig headed to first
base . . . where he promptly let an easy ball go through his feet. According
to biographers, the tryout ended almost immediately. McGraw had seen all
he needed to see.
We might call this moment McGraw’s Folly. In an instant, he sized up
and judged this kid—and make no mistake, Gehrig was a kid. He was
painfully shy, sheltered, inexperienced  .  .  . and McGraw’s inability or
unwillingness to factor that into his evaluation meant he would miss out on
the career of one of the game’s greatest talents and human beings.
Gehrig would go on to play first base for the Yankees, hit hundreds of
home runs, win six World Series and hold the record for the longest streak
of consecutive starts for over fifty years. Maybe he would have been worth
a little more patience? A slightly more open mind?
It’s essential that we learn from these misses when it comes to talent.
People are ciphers, even our own kids. We are not nearly as good at
evaluating ability and predicting the future as we think we are. So we have
to be forgiving. We can’t jump to conclusions. We have to give kids the
benefit of the doubt. We have to root for them, not write them off.
July 13
Teach Them to Choose
If your choices are beautiful, so too will you be.
—EPICTETUS
It makes sense that parents make most of the decisions for their kids.
Parents know more. Kids basically know nothing. About life. About what
the weather is going to be tomorrow. About how the world works.
The problem with this is that you’re depriving your kids of a very
important skill: the ability to make decisions. Is it any wonder that so many
teenagers are utterly overwhelmed when it comes to choosing where to go
to college? Or what to major in? For most of them, it’s the first real decision
they’ve made in their whole lives.
That’s why, as a parent, you have to actively work to not choose
everything for them. Ask them whether they want to go to the park or play
catch in the yard. Ask them what movie they want to see. What should we
cook for dinner? Do you want to take a shower tonight or a bath? Would
you rather try out for the baseball or the basketball team? If you don’t like
mowing the lawn, what’s another chore you’d like to do to contribute
around the house? Shorts or pants today? Go pick out something to wear.
Teach them how to choose. Empower them. Make sure they know how to
decide, and to be okay with their decision even if they decide wrong. It
doesn’t matter that you know more. What matters is that you let them learn.
A life is the sum and substance of a person’s decisions. Prepare them to
make good decisions so they can make the best possible life for themselves.
July 14
You Must Adjust Accordingly
The scientist Jennifer Doudna’s father was an English professor. It wasn’t
until he had a young daughter that he realized that almost all the books he
assigned to his students were written by men. Having a daughter made him
realize how acutely unfair this was, how this deprived his students of
valuable perspectives and inspiration. So, as Walter Isaacson writes in his
fascinating biography of Jennifer Doudna and the work that won her a
Nobel Prize, her father quietly “added Doris Lessing, Anne Tyler, and Joan
Didion to his syllabus.” He started bringing books home to his daughter that
might inspire her too.
Like a good father (and human being), he adjusted. Not out of political
correctness but out of real empathy. And what was the effect? Did he lose
his spine or his manhood? Did censorship win? No, his choice made the
world better! His students were better and his ability to connect with his
daughter was better. Then decades later, the world became better as a result
of this adjustment (you can thank Doudna and by extension her father for
your family’s COVID-19 mRNA vaccine).
Don’t be frozen in time. Don’t close your mind. Be open . . . and adjust.
July 15
Always Keep Their Interests in Mind
You should remember that in every person lives the same spirit which lives in us.
—ARTHUR SCHOPENHAUER
There will always be a gulf between parents and their children, at least
when it comes to taste. That is as it should be. Your tastes are informed by
years of experience and theirs by the yet unjaded joy of discovery. Why
would you like what they like? You know more!
And still, it remains an imperative—if you want to connect with them
and shape and encourage them—that you always keep their interests in
mind, because your job is to figure out what they like and help them
continue to explore it.
Oh, they liked this movie? Here’s another they might enjoy. Oh, they like
this book? Here’s the author’s entire catalog for their birthday. Oh, they like
dinosaurs? Here come the weekend trips to museums; here come the photos
of you in front of the Brachiosaurus in the United terminal at O’Hare; here
comes a dinosaur video you can watch together.
When their interests become your interests, they become opportunities to
connect and explore and to share. Let them be the driver; you just provide
the fuel.
July 16
Original Is Better Than Smart
The “C” students run the world.
—HARRY TRUMAN
We think we want smart kids. That’s why we monitor their grades, why
we hire tutors, why we help them study for the SATs. It’s even how we find
ourselves praising them: You are so smart!
But is this really setting them up for success in life? The essayist,
entrepreneur, and venture capitalist Paul Graham warns parents against
fighting the last war—trying to get their kids into good colleges to then get
good jobs available to smart people. Einstein wasn’t special because he was
smart, Graham writes, but because he had original ideas.
Think of the people we admire most; they share that feature. It wasn’t
that they were smart—it was that they had a different way of looking at the
world. They were unique, and with this uniqueness (which was often
coupled with intelligence) they did great things. So as you try to mold your
child—well, maybe stop trying to mold them and just help guide them as
they grow.
Encourage them to be their original, unique selves. Encourage them to
explore, to find new things. The world is full of smart people . . . and most
of them are insufferably boring and unimpressive. What we need are fresh
thinkers and creative people. What we need are originals.
July 17
Your Job Is to Show Them What’s Possible
That the children of successful parents turn out spoiled and lazy is a cliché
that has proven itself true across time more often than any of those parents
would like to admit. But there is also no shortage of examples that subvert
this preconception. There are numerous professional athletes with kids who
make it into the pros. Both John Quincy Adams and George W. Bush
followed their fathers to the White House. There are plenty of writers and
artists whose children went on to be successful in the arts.
How does this work? Obviously there was no shortage of natural talent.
Nepotism too. These kids were gifted and then were given big advantages.
But there is another force at play too, one that every parent should think
about. Could it be that the biggest privilege afforded to these kids was
seeing their parent passionately and practically pursue a career that most
people have trouble even imagining? That the real gift they got was seeing
that following your dreams was actually possible? And that it wasn’t magic,
it was just a lot of hard work?
Too many parents spend time either consciously or subtly telling their
kids to think small, to be realistic, to consider the odds. But living in the
same house as a professional athlete or a head of state or an award-winning
author sends a powerful message: It can be done! It just takes work,
dedication, and, of course, confidence.
That’s your real job, whatever you do for a living. To show them what’s
possible. To push them to go for it, whatever “it” is.
July 18
Don’t Give Them This
The biggest impediment to happiness in life is something that many of us
picked up very early in our lives: shame.
Shame is guilt’s evil twin. Where guilt is feeling bad about things you’ve
done; shame is feeling bad about who you are—for things about yourself
that you don’t control. Having normal, biological urges. Being
uncoordinated. Having unique artistic tastes. Struggling with social cues.
Having a limited palate or an extremely adventurous one. There is almost
no limit to the things about ourselves that we are capable of feeling shame
over.
What’s so tragic about shame, though, is that it does not come naturally.
Watch an innocent child play intently with their food or pretend completely
to be a princess or a dragon, and there isn’t a whisper of shame to be heard.
Because they have not been made to feel ashamed about these things yet.
Shame is inherited. It is passed along, often by parents, on the back of
cutting remarks, unnecessary judgments, and thoughtless choices. It’s up to
you to not let them inherit shame.
It’s up to you to let them be their own people, to let them be comfortable
in their own skin—pretending to be dragons, flailing to music you don’t
like, trying things you’d never try yourself, it doesn’t matter . . . as long as
it matters to them.
Embrace your children, so they might embrace the things that make them
unique and wholly themselves. There is no shame in that.
July 19
Encourage Them to Be the Best
There are the parents who just want their kids to have fun. And there are
the parents who push their kids to be winners. The one side believes
competition doesn’t matter; the other side believes competition is the only
thing that matters. Like so many two-sided debates, there’s a third option
that both sides miss, which is actually far superior to either, though much
more nuanced.
The great John Wooden—one of the winningest coaches in college
basketball history—said it was what he learned from his father:
Dad’s message about basketball—and life—was this: “Johnny,
don’t try to be better than somebody else, but never cease trying
to be the best you can be. You have control over that. The other
you don’t.” It was simple advice: work hard, very hard, at those
things I can control and don’t lose sleep over the rest of it.
As you put your kid out there in softball or on the debate team, as you
talk to them about their class rank or their mile time, make sure that you are
letting them know that how they compare with other people is far less
important than how they measure up against their own potential. Somebody
who gives their best effort at everything they do is going to go much further
in life (and have a happier one) than somebody who is obsessed with
coming in first place or who never earnestly tries for fear that they will lose.
So tell your kid to be the best they can be. Tell them to measure
themselves against their own potential and their own progress. Not only
does that usually lead to winning, but it is also what winners do.
July 20
Help Them Go Find It
A young Kwame Onwuachi was cooking with his mother in their
apartment in the Bronx, when suddenly the apartment was overwhelmed by
a strange smell. As he would write in his memoir, the “thick fragrant smell
of curry came on so strong both of us stopped what we were doing and
looked up.” But it wasn’t actually the smell that he remembered. It was
what his mother did next.
“Let’s go find it!” she said to him with palpable excitement, and then
together they raced down the hallways of each floor of their building, trying
to locate the source. As soon as the doors opened to the third floor, they
knew they were close. Without so much as a hesitation, his mother knocked
on the door that had so beckoned her. “My name is Jewel,” she said
confidently. “This is my son, Kwame. We live on the sixth floor. We
couldn’t help but smell what you were cooking.”
The woman was stunned. Fear registered across her face. Were they
about to complain? To say something offensive? No, that wasn’t his
mother’s style. “It smells wonderful,” she said. “I don’t know how to say
this, but we’d like to try it!”
How did Kwame go on to start his own catering company, graduate from
the Culinary Institute, work at Per Se, and start one of the most talked-about
restaurants in America, before his twenty-fourth birthday? It can all be
traced back to this surreal exchange. His mother showed him in that
moment so many wonderful traits: Curiosity. Confidence. Assertiveness.
Figureoutable-ness. Passion. Neighborliness.
These are all things we can and must teach our children in our own way.
But it can start by following our nose.
July 21
Stop Trying to Change Them
My wife and I, our whole job is to provide, to protect, to love, to facilitate. . . .
It’s to find out who our children are, find out their likes and their dislikes, and try
to help them through life, to find themselves. It’s not about us.
—DWYANE WADE
We should always try to learn from parents who have had it harder than
us, who have really been through the wringer.
Brandon Boulware is the son of a minister. He’s a lawyer, an avowed
Christian man, a husband, and the father of four children. In 2021, he gave
deeply moving testimony to the Missouri House of Representatives about
his struggles with his transgender daughter. He told the lawmakers that he’d
long tried—out of fear and love and a desire to protect—to keep his child
from wearing girls’ clothes and playing on girls’ teams. Then one day, she
asked him if she could go play with the neighbors. It’s time for dinner, he
said. But if I go out in boy clothes, can I play with them? came the reply.
Then it hit him: he’d accidentally taught his child that not being who she is
was a way to be rewarded.
What Boulware so beautifully communicates in his brief testimony is a
lesson for all parents. “Let them have their childhoods,” he pleads. “Let
them be who they are.”
Maybe you’re artistic and your kid is not. Maybe you’re athletic and your
kid is not. Maybe you’re not religious and your teenager is. Maybe you’re
liberal and your kid is not. Whatever it is, let them be who they are. Let
them experiment. Let them discover themselves—let them discover their
truths. Let them have their childhoods.
You might not like the results of these explorations. They might
challenge your most deeply held assumptions. But guess what? That’s a you
problem.
July 22
They Don’t Know What They Want
Nobody knows anything.
—WILLIAM GOLDMAN
As a parent, it’s really easy to force your kids to do stuff. You’re bigger
than them. You control the purse strings. You possess the legal and moral
authority to make them do what you think is best for them. But when you
wield that power without so much as a conversation, you’re teaching them
that they have no power, no control, that their wishes don’t really matter in
your house, in this life.
You’re also setting up a bad habit for yourself. You won’t always have
this power over them. You don’t want to habituate a kind of disrespect for,
or disinterest in, what they think they want. Because one day, they’ll want
to change their college major. They’ll want to move across the country.
They’ll want to make some lifestyle change you disagree with. They’ll want
to tweak some long-standing family tradition. And you will be so used to
thinking that you know better, that you are the decider, that you won’t be
able to handle it. Especially the part where they don’t have to listen to you.
But worse than that, your relationship with your kids won’t be able to
weather the fallout from your egotistical implosion.
Your kids don’t always know what they want. But guess what? Nobody
does. So you have to figure out how to be in charge without being a tyrant,
how to generally know better without being a know-it-all. You have to learn
how to use the gravity of your experience to move them gently in the
direction they should go, instead of using the mass of your position as
parent to force them that way.
This won’t be easy . . . but such is the life (and balancing act) of being a
parent.
July 23
How Often Do You Say No?
Even those of us who don’t think of ourselves as strict parents should stop
and think about just how often our kids hear us say the word no. As in: “No,
stop that.” “No, you can’t go out tonight.” “No, get off of there.” “No, we
have to go home.” “No, I’m not buying you that.” “No, that’s not how you
do that.”
It’s not that we’re demanding; it’s just that we care. This might keep
them safe, but the downside is that from the perspective of a two-year-old
or a twenty-year-old, it means that basically all they hear their parent say is
no. No, no, no, no.
Harry Truman, father of a daughter, Margaret, had a clever quip about
this: “I have found the best way to give advice to your children is to find
out what they want and then advise them to do it.”
His point is that nobody likes to be told what to do. And your job isn’t to
make them do all the things you want them to do; it’s to help them do the
things they want to do (safely and within reason, of course).
It’s their life, after all. Learn how to say yes. Learn how to advise them
on what they are going to do anyway—so that if you can’t stop it, you can
at least prepare them. Be someone who helps, not the kind of parent who
only gets in the way.
July 24
You Have to Listen
The reason why we have two ears and only one mouth is so we might listen more
and talk less.
—ZENO
Shortly after the release of his book Parents Who Lead, Dr. Stewart
Friedman—an award-winning psychologist and a leading researcher on
leadership and work-life integration—was asked what great new
discoveries or insights he came across in the process of writing the book.
“My favorite,” he said, “was about how much parents have to gain by
learning how to listen to their children about what they really need.” Dr.
Friedman elaborated:
It’s often quite surprising to hear what’s actually on their minds
and how you can be a better leader in your family when you know
what’s in the hearts and minds of those precious people who look
up to you. One father, who was keen to impress upon his son the
value of curiosity and study, asked him what he was interested in
learning. To his utter delight, his son said, “I want to learn to
vacuum.” His son wanted to be useful; he wanted to contribute
and have a purpose himself. You don’t really know, in other
words, what’s inside until you pay attention, with dedication and
compassion, like effective leaders do.
That little fellow is always trying to tell you things. Of course, it’s not
always explicit. Sometimes “I want to learn to be useful” comes out as “I
want to learn to vacuum.” Sometimes “I want to be a good friend” comes
out as “Can you drive me to Bobby’s house?” Sometimes “I want to be a
writer” comes out as an awkward kid who doesn’t want to watch sports
with you.
Still, they are always trying to tell you something. And you’ll hear them
only if you’re really listening.
July 25
Don’t Help Them Become Who You Were
Tim Hardaway Jr. is the son of an NBA Hall of Famer. Growing up, it was
hard being the son of someone who had played the game at such a high
level, particularly while trying to master the same sport himself.
In the car on the way home from games, Tim Sr. would highlight the
mistakes Tim Jr. had made, the shots he should have made, the plays he
should have made. He’d say, “You’re not performing at a high-enough
level” and “Get better, or we’ll stop you from playing the game of
basketball forever.” If Tim Jr. didn’t want to watch basketball on TV, Tim
Sr. would shake his head and say, “You don’t love the game enough.”
Tim Sr. would say that he put this pressure on his son because he loved
him: “I wanted him to play like I had played, to take the game seriously like
I took the game seriously, understand the game like I understood the game.”
Sure, it “worked out” in the sense that Tim Hardaway Jr. is a great
basketball player too . . . but is that because his dad said mean things to
him? Or threatened him? Or could it have just as much to do with the fact
that he’s six foot five, has a six-foot-seven-inch wingspan, and played in
college for John Beilein? And let’s say it hadn’t worked out or had just
worked out less well. Don’t you think both father and son, in retrospect,
would have taken that trade if it meant they had a better relationship?
As we’ve said, our job is to help our kids become who they are. It’s not
to help them become who we were. It’s not their responsibility to carry on
your legacy, to play the sport you played, to wear the number you wore.
July 26
What Are You Making Them Do?
There’s a line adapted from Aristotle but given to us by the historian Will
Durant:
We are what we repeatedly do. Therefore, excellence is not an act
but a habit.
The real question as parents, then, is What are we making our kids do?
Excellence isn’t something we pursue as a destination. It’s something we
pursue in the doing. Day in and day out. In the little things as well as the big
things. It’s something that emerges when we turn that type of pursuit,
through action, into a habit. And it’s our job as parents to help our kids
understand this. To help them realize who they are by what they do day to
day, what they do this day, today.
We are what we do repeatedly.
July 27
Why? Why? Why?
I would rather have questions that can’t be answered than answers that can’t be
questioned.
—RICHARD FEYNMAN
As a parent, there is no word you hear more. Why? Why not? Why can’t
I? Why do I have to? Why does it work like that? Why? Why? Why? Why?
Why?
It’s annoying, to be sure, but you must be sure to never discourage this.
So much of what we take for granted as parents, and as people, is arbitrary
and poorly supported. Perhaps that’s because at a young age our own
impulse to question and explore was suppressed. We were not taught to see
that most of the rules and limitations of the world have no real basis in
logic, or reason, or even morality.
When we asked “Why?” we were told, “Because.” Full stop. We were
not encouraged to challenge assumptions, to question the status quo, to
learn why things are the way they are. And our limited access to wisdom
and truth limited us in turn.
Let’s not continue this tradition. Let’s turn over a new leaf with this
generation—the one we are in charge of raising into the best versions of
themselves. We want our kids to make the world a better place; we want
them to improve things; we want them to be better than us.
That can’t happen if they are complacent, if they are credulous, if they
don’t think they are empowered to subject their reality to even the simplest
interrogation and demand answers accordingly.
“Why?” is a great question. Help them see that.
And then help them answer it.
July 28
Give Them Space
If you’re not careful, their whole lives get filled up.
Basketball practice. School. Cello lessons. Chores at home. You don’t
want them in front of screens all day; you don’t want them to waste their
lives or fall behind. You want them to make something of themselves.
But you have to be careful. Even two thousand years ago, Plutarch was
warning parents to not overschedule and overplan their kid’s lives.
“Children must be given some breathing space from continued tasks,” he
wrote, “for we must bear in mind that our whole life is divided between
relaxation and application.”
Do you do your best work when you are exhausted and stretched too
thin? Are you happy when your calendar is full? Aren’t you tired of running
them from place to place? Imagine how they feel! They don’t even fully
understand what stress is, what burnout is. So it’s incumbent upon you to
protect them from it.
Give them space. Give them the opportunity to relax. That’s your job.
July 29
Do Not Get in the Way of Their Primal Inclinations
You want to show them your favorite movies. Your favorite bands. All the
places you loved as a kid. The sports you love to play or watch.
This is special and wonderful, because you’re sharing not just
experiences or sights or sounds or tastes but parts of yourself. These things
shaped who you are and how you became that person, and to share that is to
give your kids a deeper look at the person raising them. But you should
share with caution.
Just as you shouldn’t overtly pressure your kids into a certain lane (“You
need to become a doctor”), the author Robert Greene said, parents must be
careful of the less overt forms of pressure—steering them to be interested in
the things you are interested in, forcing them to participate in this activity or
play that sport, calling the arts or entrepreneurship “risky” or artists and
entrepreneurs “crazy.” As Robert said:
As a parent, you need to let go. You need to let your child
blossom. You need to think of your child like they’re a plant that
you want to foster and grow in its most natural form and not
hinder in any way. You have to let your child go in whatever
direction he or she wants. When the child reveals a proclivity
toward something, encourage them to go in that direction.
Because that proclivity reveals something extremely powerful
from within—it reveals what I call a primal inclination. Do not
get in the way of their primal inclinations in any way, shape, or
form. That’s the most important thing you can do.
Throw away your expectations. Your responsibility is to encourage them
to be who they are, not what you want them to be or who you wish you’d
become. Don’t force your interests on your child. Pay attention to their
natural, primal inclinations, then foster their blossoming.
July 30
This Is Always in Their Control
We don’t get to pick how tall our kids are, and neither do they. It’s
beyond their control whether they’re big or small, whether they have the
fastest reflexes or the strongest muscles or the quickest wit. They don’t
control whether the coach loves them . . . or is a jerk. They don’t control
most of what happens in the classroom, or in the locker room for that
matter. As Cheryl Strayed writes in Tiny Beautiful Things, “You don’t have
a right to the cards you believe you should have been dealt.”
So what do we tell our kids to focus on? What is always up to them?
What they do in response to those circumstances. What’s up to them is
whether they do their best or not. Whether they try hard. Whether they find
a way to enjoy the process and live up to their potential.
So after practice, after the game, after the big test, you need to make sure
that your questions and your criteria for judging them reflect that. Meaning
not “Did you guys win?” or “Did you pass?” but “Did you have fun?” or
“Did you do your best?” or “What do you think you could have done better
to prepare?”
We don’t control the hand we’re dealt. Our biology isn’t up to us, nor is
our place in the world (geographically or socioeconomically). But our kids
(or families) decide how we play that hand. We decide what we do about it.
We decide whether we give it our all. We decide who we become.
Teach them that.
July 31
Prepare Them to Answer the Call
To each,” Winston Churchill said, “there comes in their lifetime a special
moment when they are figuratively tapped on the shoulder and offered the
chance to do a very special thing, unique to them and fitted to their talents.
What a tragedy if that moment finds them unprepared or unqualified for
that which could have been their finest hour.”
It’s more accurate to say that life has many of these moments, many such
taps on the shoulder: to serve, to take a risk, to run toward danger while
others run away, to do a thing that people say is impossible.
Our kids will have many reasons to think what they’re planning is the
wrong thing to do. They will be pressured to put their dreams out of their
mind. Fear will make itself felt. Will they let it prevent them from
answering the call? Will they leave the phone ringing? Will their moment
find them unprepared? Will their finest hour pass them by like a ship in the
night?
What a tragedy that would be. As parents, we have to make sure that
doesn’t happen to our kids. We have to help them inch closer and closer to
doing what they were put here to do, to being who they were meant to
become. We are supposed to prepare them for when the phone rings, for
when they get tapped on the shoulder, because the one thing we know for
certain is that the call is going to come.
Will they be prepared to answer?
AUGUST
ALWAYS BE A FAN
(THE GREATEST GIFT YOU CAN GIVE THEM)
August 1
You Can Give Them This Gift
Jim Valvano wasn’t yet out of high school when he first told his dad he had
decided what he wanted to do with the rest of his life. He wasn’t just going
to be a collegiate basketball coach, he said: “Dad, I’m going to win a
national championship.”
A few days after Jim told his dad about his dream, his dad called him into
his bedroom. “See that suitcase?” his father asked, pointing to the luggage
in the corner. Confused, Jim replied, “Yeah, what’s that all about?” “I’m
packed,” his dad explained. “When you play and win that national
championship I’m going to be there. My bags are already packed.”
“My father,” Jim would later say in his legendary ESPY speech, “gave
me the greatest gift anyone could give another person: he believed in me.”
Have you given this gift to your children? Our job is to spur our children
to conceive of big dreams, to encourage them to go after them, to give them
the greatest gift anyone can give another person: belief. Because if you
don’t believe in them, who will?
August 2
Just Be a Fan
Maybe your kid is into weird stuff. Maybe their heavy metal band sucks
—or their talents as a rapper are almost offensive. Maybe you can’t stand
the shows they like, or maybe their dream is an unlikely one at best. Or
maybe they are supremely skilled and have what it takes to go pro. Maybe
with the right prodding and the right support they could be truly special,
and you just need to make sure they don’t slack off and miss the
opportunities they need for that to happen.
But is that really your most important job? Your first job is to be a fan.
Just a fan. Of them. Of their talents or lack thereof. Of their chances or lack
thereof.
They don’t need a drill sergeant in the living room. They don’t need
someone calling them out. They don’t need someone telling them the hard
truths. They don’t even necessarily need your money to put them in that
fancy league. They don’t need you to berate their teachers and demand
special treatment. They don’t need you to be obsessed.
What they need is a fan. They need someone who supports them, who
loves them, who is rooting for them. They need a fan with a healthy
relationship to the game—not a stalker or a tyrant.
Just be a fan. It’s not that complicated.
August 3
What Are You Going to Focus On?
You can look at all the negative in the world. You can focus on the dark
clouds above. Or you can look for the silver lining, the bright spots. We
have that expression about whether the glass is half full or half empty. Well,
what worldview are you going to teach your children?
Are you going to fill your house with doom and gloom? Or are you going
to teach your kids to hope, to believe in their ability to make a difference, to
find the opportunity inside the obstacles that life presents?
The author Alex Haley once said that he believed his job as a writer was
to “find good and praise it.” That fits in a parent’s job description too.
We’re always going to have more success rewarding good behavior in our
kids than punishing bad behavior. Looking for what we want to see in them
and making that our focus is going to get us much further than seeking out
conflict and engaging in criticism. This principle extends to our perceptions
and portrayal of the world as well. It’s better for everyone to talk up what
we want to see instead of constantly bemoaning all the evil and wrongness
that we can’t seem to escape.
We have a choice: Inspire or disillusion. Empower or depress. What will
it be?
August 4
Don’t Be a Minimizer
The parenting style that is good for grit is also the parenting style good for most
other things: Be really, really demanding, and be very, very supportive.
—ANGELA DUCKWORTH
Ed Stack was a great kid. He worked quietly and loyally for the family
business, Dick’s Sporting Goods. He saved up enough money that
eventually he could buy his father out and grow the family legacy. He tells
the story of the first big-box store he opened. The company had previously
operated stores that were a couple thousand square feet at most. This new
store was twenty thousand square feet. It was transformative for the
business—sales skyrocketed.
Reps from Nike were talking to Ed’s father, the original founder, and said
something about how proud he must be of his kid. To be succeeding like
that. To be taking the store to the next level. As Ed explained, “My father,
who could never really quite give you a compliment, looked at them and
said, ‘You’re right, they did a lot of business. They did 25 percent more
business than they thought they would the first month. So they’re not really
as smart as they think they are.’ ”
Sadly, who hasn’t heard something like this from someone they
desperately wanted to make proud? Those backhanded compliments. That
way of cutting you down to size, of looking for some flaw, of seizing on
your insecurities. What bullshit it is! Instead of taking the opportunity to
show their love, they have to let their own fragile sense of self get in the
way.
The minimum of being a good parent is not being a minimizer. Don’t
look for what’s wrong, look for what’s right . . . and celebrate it! Lift them
up, don’t cut them down. Root for them; that’s what they want more than
anything.
August 5
There Are Better Forms of Motivation
Across sports, politics, business, even the arts, we see a theme driving the
most ambitious, the hardest working, the biggest risk-takers. Be they men
or women, they all seem to be craving something, trying to prove
something. The approval of their father. The love of their families. To shove
it in the faces of the doubters. To get as far away as possible from the
trauma.
It’s hard not to see that this is real and productive fuel. As a parent, it
should also be hard to see it, period. Because there are so many other forms
of fuel out there that don’t involve pain or what is, in many cases, a kind of
abuse. Tiger Woods was set up to succeed in golf by his father’s regimen of
hyperattention as well as neglect. Did that help him? Sure. But given how
incredibly talented and smart and hardworking Tiger is, don’t you think he
could have accomplished a lot without essentially being tortured with
prisoner-of-war tactics?
You can subject your kids to hard and difficult things and it may help
make them successful. These things may have even helped you be
successful. 
Yelling. 
Blunt 
truths. 
Endless 
workouts. 
Emotional
manipulation. These things work  .  .  . but they also come at a steep
emotional cost. Encouragement and genuine support, on the other hand,
work equally well and have the added benefit of bringing you closer to your
kids and making you both better people.
Choose the right form of motivation. Not the harshest.
August 6
Seldom Should Be Heard a Discouraging Word
The innocent and helpless creature bestowed on them by heaven, whom to bring
up to good, and whose future lot it was in their hands to direct to happiness or
misery.
—MARY WOLLSTONECRAFT SHELLEY
If you’re not paying attention, it’s easy to slip into a kind of casual,
thoughtless negativity: Why is your room so dirty? Why are you in such a
bad mood today? Hey, stop doing that! Don’t touch this. No, you can’t
watch TV right now. Why isn’t your room clean? No, you can’t have that.
I’m disappointed with how you did on this test. That is just not realistic;
shouldn’t you think about trying something else? I don’t think so. You
already know the answer . . . and the answer is “no.”
This happens not because you’re a bad parent but rather because you’re a
good one. You have rules and you enforce them. You have expectations and
you push your kids to meet them. You know what’s best. You want to keep
them safe and you have a house to run.
But still, if you’re not careful, it can come to be that almost every
interaction you have with your kids is negative. It can start to feel, from
their perspective, like an endless cascade of disappointment. And then,
before you know it, you’ve become the voice of discouragement without
even thinking about it.
Is that who you are? Is that the kind of relationship you want to have? If
it isn’t, then you need to pay attention. Watch your words. Count your yeses
and nos. Be intentional about what you focus on. Let the little things go. Be
positive.
August 7
Playing with Your Kids Is Everything
The years before the Civil War were rough on Ulysses S. Grant. He was
struggling to make a life for his family. There was a sadness about his life,
an endless drudgery of frustration and disappointment, of one failed career,
one hardship after another.
There was only one respite to this. When Grant opened the front door to
his house after work each day, his young son, Jesse, was waiting to
challenge him to a fight. Jesse would boast he could beat his father. Grant,
with faux seriousness, would look at the tiny boy and answer the
provocation, “I do not feel like fighting, Jesse, but I can’t stand being
hectored in this manner by a man of your size.” Jesse would then hurl
himself at his father until he brought him down. On the ground, Grant
would beg for mercy and shout that it wasn’t fair to attack an opponent who
had fallen.
In just a few short years, Grant’s bulldog tenacity and toughness would
shock—and save—the nation. It was Grant who broke the back of the
Confederate army, fighting brutal battle after brutal battle. But those who
knew him best knew that at heart he was a softy. That he loved his family
more than anything.
It doesn’t matter what you do for a living or how bleak things might be—
playing with your kids is a wonderful thing. Play with them if they’re
young. Play with them if they’re old, if you’re old. Have fun with them. Be
kids together. Play. Play. Play.
August 8
Don’t Wait to Be Proud
It’s a story as old as parenthood itself. The child tries and tries to win the
approval of their parent, which never seems to come. There is pain,
resentment, bewilderment. Only at the end, after much pain and resentment,
is it revealed: The child had the thing they wanted all along. They just never
knew.
This was the story of Claudia Williams, the daughter of Ted Williams.
Only buried in a pile of memorabilia did she find a note left by her
impossible-to-please father.
“To my beautiful daughter,” it said. “I love you. Dad.”
It’s the story of the brilliant publisher Sonny Mehta. In Mehta’s obituary,
Roger Cohen wrote:
When Mehta’s father, a diplomat, died in Vienna, Mehta found in
his desk a folder with every article ever published about him. The
pride of his father, who had never complimented his son, was
evident.
It breaks your heart. Why couldn’t they have expressed this when they
were alive? Was it a generational thing? Did they think it was helping to
make their kids better, tougher? Why couldn’t they have been more like Jim
Valvano’s father and given their kids the gift of being a fan?
We’ll never know the answer to those questions. What we do know is we
can’t do this with our own kids. We can’t wait to be proud. We can’t keep
our feelings for them hidden under piles of paper or in a drawer in our desk.
We have to tell them now. We have to show them now. That we’re rooting
for them. That we love them. That we believe in them. That we’re proud of
them. Because we are. And they deserve to know it—before it’s too late.
August 9
You’re Not Raising Grass
In his induction speech for the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1984, Harmon
Killebrew told the story of a time he was playing in the front yard with his
father and his brother. His mom came out to tell them it was time for dinner
and admonished them for tearing up the grass. “We’re not raising grass,” his
father replied. “We’re raising boys.”
Success as a parent is not defined by having a car with spotless back
seats. It’s not having a perfectly decorated house filled with fragile things
that never get broken. A kid’s room should look like it was played in. A
home should feel lived in. We should see their fingerprints everywhere—
literally and figuratively.
Is your job really to raise a kid who never talks back? Who walks in
lockstep or tiptoes through life? Or is it to raise a kid with their own
opinions and their own dreams, with the confidence to articulate them and
the ability to bring them to life?
The yard is there to be played in. The bike is made to be ridden, not kept
in the garage in pristine condition. Your floors will be scratched. Food will
be spilled. Messes will accumulate. Noises will be made.
Good. We’re not trying to keep a spotless, quiet house. We’re raising
healthy, well-adjusted, happy children.
August 10
Engage with the Slime
For a long time, one of the arbitrary rules in Jeannie Gaffigan’s house had
to do with where, when, and how slime could be made. Maybe your kids
are too old to care about slime, but it’s not difficult to relate to Jeannie’s
dilemma. Sure, slime is fun for kids to make, but it’s a pain in the ass to
clean up, and who do you think is the one left with the scrubber and the
paper towels in their hands?
At some point, though, Jeannie Gaffigan, a mother of five and the wife
and longtime collaborator of the comedian Jim Gaffigan, had a change of
heart about her rules—particularly after a battle with a life-threatening brain
tumor: “I realized that I never asked, ‘Can you teach me how to make the
slime?’ I never engaged with the slime. I engaged with the control of the
slime.”
Life is too short to nix your children’s interests because you don’t want to
deal with a mess afterward. Think about it: How many negative rules do we
make related to things? Food in the living room, shoes on the carpet, toys
outside the playroom. These rules are often designed to make our lives
easier as parents, but one of their unintended side effects is to make our
kids’ lives less fun.
At the same time, we also seem to have fewer positive rules for
ourselves. Why not a rule about being interested? Why not a rule about
playing and having fun together? Why not a rule about encouraging their
fascinations rather than curtailing them?
Let’s work with the slime, not against it.
August 11
What Kind of Voice Are You Giving Them?
You hear it all the time. It’s been there all your life. That voice in your
head. The one that tells you what’s right, what you ought to do. This voice
can also turn nasty, whispering that you’re not good enough, that everyone
sees through you, that you’ll never measure up.
The performance psychologist Dr. Jim Loehr, who has studied countless
athletes and elite leaders, says this voice is the key to success. “I began to
realize,” he said in an interview, “what really mattered in a really significant
way: the tone and content of the voice no one hears. I came to understand
that the ultimate coach for all of us in life is that private voice.”
Where does it come from? Where did you get that voice originally? It
came from your parents, mostly. As Loehr explains, we “know it begins to
form as early as five years of age, and it comes principally from the
authority figures in your life . . . however functional or dysfunctional.”
This should sober us as parents. We are responsible for the voice that will
live inside our kids’ head for the rest of their lives. We decide whether that
voice will belong to a wise and patient ancestor or a cruel and unpredictable
ghost. We decide whether it will be a voice of conscience and kindness or
doubt and insecurity. We decide that by what we say to them, by what we
show them.
In each moment of every day.
August 12
Here’s What Matters
The best way to make children good is to make them happy.
—OSCAR WILDE
The author Rich Cohen loves hockey. He loves watching his kids excel at
it. Like any parent, the last thing he wants is for them to struggle or, worse,
to be shortchanged—whether it’s playing time or respect.
In his lovely book Pee Wees: Confessions of a Hockey Parent, Rich tells
one story about a conversation he had with his son’s coach. His son wasn’t
being given the time on the ice Rich thought he deserved, so he tried to
make a case for it. The coach, on the other hand, had no patience. “Let me
ask you this. Is Micah happy?” he said. “Yes,” Rich replied. “Is Micah
having fun?” “Yes,” Rich had to admit. And that’s when the coach got him
with something every parent ought to be reminded of: “Then what do you
care?”
If our kids are having fun, if they’re happy, if they’re learning, if they’re
building bonds with teammates, then nothing else matters. Our duty as
parents is not to optimize our kids for success. It’s to teach them how to be
present, how to find things they love, how to be a good person, how to
respond to the situations life puts them in. That’s it.
Everything else? What do we care?
August 13
Be Careful of Your Implications
King George VI referred to his daughters as his “pride and joy.” To be
more specific, he referred to the two of them as “Pride” and “Joy.” Princess
Elizabeth was “Pride” and Princess Margaret was “Joy.” Only with time did
the two of them realize the sad implications of his remark—that he was
proud of one and had fun with the other, and therefore found less happiness
in the former and less pride in the latter. If only it were just a clever remark.
If only there hadn’t been real truth in it—if his actions hadn’t confirmed it
—there would have been little to infer.
It’s so easy to joke: about our “easy” child and our “difficult one,” about
our “favorite,” about our “special” one, about who or what “will be the
death of us.” God knows how many thoughtless asides about our kids have
popped out of our mouths in casual conversation.
We have to consider the implications of the words we throw about like
that. Because our kids are listening, and they really hear us. They are
always trying to understand themselves and their place in the world. The
things we say today, when they are young, will come back to them when
they are older, and they will fit those words, for better and for worse, into
the narrative of their lives.
August 14
Don’t Merge Like This
Joan Didion didn’t get into Stanford. She was crushed. Her father looked at
her and shrugged. You might think that his lack of empathy added to her
pain and frustration. But with time, she came to understand that her father
had gotten the moment exactly right.
“I think about that shrug with a great deal of appreciation whenever I
hear parents talking about their children’s chances,” Didion would write in
a classic essay on college in 1968. “What makes me uneasy is the sense that
they are merging their children’s chances with their own, demanding of a
child that he make good not only for himself but for the greater glory of his
father and mother.”
Her father shrugged because he had not placed any of his identity into
what college his daughter got into. Perhaps he could have done a little
better at understanding how much of her identity had been put into it. But
then again, maybe that was the point. He wanted to show her how little it
actually mattered—how her success or failure in life was going to be based
on something far less superficial than college admissions.
And so it must go with us. We encourage our children. We want to set
them up to succeed. But we can’t merge their glory into our own. We can’t
let them think they have to impress us, make us proud, or worry that they
have let us down or failed us. Certainly, we can’t let them think that where
they go (or don’t go) to school has any bearing on who they are to us . . . or
what they can do with their lives.
August 15
It Should Be the Easiest Thing in the World
Parenting is very hard. Keeping your kids safe. Keeping them fed.
Keeping them in the best schools, making sure they get good grades in
those schools. We have to do all this as we navigate a world where
Murphy’s Law is real, where bills have to get paid, where we have our own
crap to deal with that no one is going to handle for us.
In that sense, parenting is an impossible job with impossible
expectations. Yet in another, very real sense, being a parent is actually about
the easiest job in the world. Because what do they really need? What is
really demanded of you? That you love them. That you accept them. That
you support and encourage them. That you cheer for them. That you be
their biggest fan.
Nothing—literally nothing short of death—can stop you from doing
those things. Seriously, how hard is it to believe in them? How hard is it to
be encouraging? How hard is it to remind them that you don’t care what’s
happened, what other people say, that you know they have goodness and
potential inside them?
And here’s the thing: death can’t stop you from doing those things either,
because if you do them now—if you give your kids what they need
cheerfully, regularly, sincerely—it will stick with them as a voice in their
heads for as long as they and their own children live.
August 16
They Need Somebody to Do This
You might not think of Muhammad Ali as someone who needed anyone
to believe in him, but that’s because you saw him only later in life. You saw
the confident boxer, the brilliant self-promoter, the master of his craft, the
fearless warrior.
But there was a time when he was a scared child, like every other kid. He
was a young black boy named Cassius Clay in a segregated America, who
struggled at Central High School in Louisville, Kentucky. His parents, worn
down by life and work, expected little of him; the world, even less.
One person believed in Cassius Clay, however, and it was enough to
change everything.
“Here he is, ladies and gentlemen!” his school principal, Atwood Wilson,
would shout when he saw him, “Cassius Clay! The next heavyweight
champion of the world. This guy is going to make a million dollars!” When
some teachers wanted to fail Cassius, whose priority was athletics, not
academics, Wilson intervened and gave a speech that few ever forgot. “Do
you think I am going to be the principal of a school that Cassius Clay didn’t
finish?” he told them. “He’s not going to fail in my school. I’m going to
say, ‘I taught him!’ ”
Every kid needs someone like this. Somebody who believes in them.
Why was Muhammad Ali such a great fighter? Because somebody fought
for him. You know who can do this for your kids? Who has to be that first,
loudest, most resolute cheerleader for them? You.
August 17
Give Them Plenty of These
It never hurts to say a good word for your player.
—BILL RUSSELL
Queen Elizabeth II had a strange job. What were her daily duties? It’s hard
to say. It’s easier to describe all the things she didn’t do. She never passed
laws. She never chose elected leaders. She didn’t voice her opinion.
She did give out a lot of awards, though. Literally hundreds of thousands
of them over the course of her seventy-year reign. She once said:
People need pats on the back sometimes. It’s a very dingy world
otherwise.
Very true.
Nobody needs a pat on the back more than your kids  .  .  . and there’s
nobody they’d rather get it from than you. Take an extra beat today to let
your kids know what’s special about them. Give them that pat on the back.
August 18
You Are the Toy
It is a happy talent to know how to play.
—RALPH WALDO EMERSON
Your son asks you to play trains, so you get the track down from the shelf.
Your daughter wants to do a puzzle, so you start laying out the pieces. Then
for some reason that is beyond the grasp of every parent who has ever lived,
the moment you do what they say they want, they suddenly lose interest. Or
they won’t play by the rules, or they ask for something else, or now they
want to move to a different room.
If you get exasperated—What toy do you want?!—you are missing the
point. Or at least misunderstanding it. You see, you are the toy. What they
want is to play with you—they don’t want to be given a puppet, they want
to pull your puppet strings.
When you understand this, everything is easier—no matter what age they
are. Why is your teenager rebelling? In part, to get a rise out of you. Why is
your middle-schooler being a smart aleck? To see how you’ll respond. Why
is your toddler calling for water from their bedroom, only to change their
mind to juice, only to explain they meant the other juice, only to now ask to
go to the bathroom. Because it’s funny. Because it’s a game. Because
they’re playing with the little bit of power they have in this strange,
uncontrollable world: their power over the adults who have power over
them.
So relax. Just go with it. Understand what’s happening. It’s not about the
puzzle. It’s not about anything. You are the toy.
August 19
You Must Have Their Back
When Sir Archibald Southby questioned Randolph Churchill’s war record
on the floor of Parliament, he hadn’t meant anything personal. In fact, right
afterward, he tried to shake Winston Churchill’s hand, intending to explain
it away as just politics.
No such thing existed to the Churchills.
“Do not speak to me,” Winston Churchill told the man coldly. “You
called my son a coward. You are my enemy. Do not speak to me.”
Now, Randolph Churchill was not perfect, but that didn’t prevent his
father from standing up for him, from having his back. Nor should it ever
prevent us. Winston Churchill’s own father had not supported or believed in
his son. Winston, deciding to do better, would not make that same mistake.
He backed his son. He fought for him. He let Randolph know he could
always be counted on.
We have to do the same. Our kids are going to screw up, but they need to
know we’ll never write them off. Our kids need to know that we’ll take
their side, that we’ll fight for them, that we’ll never let anyone wrongly
abuse or attack them without hearing from us about it.
August 20
Encourage the Dream
It’s not that parents don’t believe in their kids. It’s that they know the world
is hard. They know that the odds are long. And most of all, nobody wants
harm or crushing disappointment to come to their children. That’s why we
discourage them from dropping out, from trying to make it as a musician,
from quitting their job to start a company. We’re just worried.
Will Ferrell—one of the greatest comedic actors of all time, as we’ve
talked about—certainly challenged his parents in this way. You’re going to
become a sketch comedian? What?!? Even his father, a working musician,
had reservations about his pursuing such an uncertain, unstable career.
Thankfully, he caught himself before Will came to him for advice. Putting
his very natural, understandable worries on the back burner, Roy Lee Ferrell
led with support and belief: “You know what? I think you have the skill, but
it takes a lot of luck. If you don’t make it, don’t worry about it. You can just
try something else.”
Roy Lee was communicating to Will, from his own hard-won experience,
just how hard and unlikely success was in one of those much-dreamed-of
career fields. He was saying, You’re talented and I believe in you, but it’s
going to be really hard, so hard that if it doesn’t work, you have to
understand that it’s just a reflection on the industry and not on you as a
person.
That is an incredible gift to give your children. Permission to try  .  .  .
along with permission to fail. The signal that you’ll support them either
way, that nothing changes based on the path they choose, the heights they
reach, or the marks they fall short of.
August 21
Don’t Care More Than They Do
In another great scene from Rich Cohen’s amazing book on parenting
through the lens of youth hockey, Rich tries to console his son after he
doesn’t make the team, in what was an extremely unfair process. Rich
expected his son would be angry or at least aware of what had happened.
He writes, “He was bugged but not devastated or even all that upset. Which
upset me. Why did I care more than he did?”
This is a great question. Why do you care more than they do? Why are
you spending so much time telling them they’ve been hurt (when they
haven’t been)? Why do you need them to take everything as seriously as
you do?
When our kids get older, some of these things will become their problem.
But for now? Let them have their childhood. They are young; they
understand and feel things differently than you do. Don’t assume that the
“adult” way is better or necessarily more correct. There is a wisdom to their
innocence—defer to it, or at least respect it enough not to corrupt it.
August 22
This Is a Tough Balance
Pleased but never satisfied.
—MICHAEL DELL
As parents, we have to figure out the balance between supporting our kids
and pushing them.
It’s like those early days at the park when they find their way to the
swing set for the first time. In the beginning, it’s all about providing support
while they get comfortable with the pendular motion of the swing. Then
you start pushing a little more. But push too hard too soon and they can fly
off the front or whip themselves off the back when the swing comes falling
back toward the bottom. Eventually they get used to the ebb and flow of the
swing, they find their grip confidently on the chains, they know how to
anticipate the force of ever bigger pushes and the resulting swings in the
other direction. And when that finally happens, that’s when they start
pumping their legs on their own, sending themselves as high as they can—
higher than you ever thought they would be comfortable reaching.
As parents, that’s the shifting balance we must find—and keep—at all
times if we are to do right by our kids, because nobody improves in life
simply by remaining where they are.
Finding that balance between pushing too hard and not falling off the
swing can also help us to examine how we teach our kids about ambition
and personal development. Push your kids to do their best—be pleased but
never satisfied. Push them to try new things, take new chances. At the same
time, be happy with their best, even if it means losing the game. Our job is
to push them to new heights, and to be thrilled with wherever they land.
August 23
They Don’t Need a Lecture. They Need This.
Which teacher is more worthy  .  .  . the one who savages his students if their
memory fails or their eye clumsily falters when reading, or the one who prefers
to correct and teach with admonitions that bring a blush to the students’ cheeks?
Show me a brutal tribune or centurion and I’ll show you one who makes soldiers
desert—pardonably.
—SENECA
As John Steinbeck was writing East of Eden, his son Tom was not taking
school seriously. He was acting out. Steinbeck’s wife thought Tom needed a
lecture about this. Steinbeck, then in the middle of writing about two very
different, unruly sets of sons, knew that wasn’t quite right. “He needs more
than that,” he wrote in his journal. “He needs infinite patience and
discipline.”
Not only is that what your kids need, but it’s what we all need. Patience
and discipline. Kindness combined with firmness. In an infinite amount.
Nobody wants to be lectured. Nobody wants to be nagged. What we need is
to be understood and held accountable.
Think of your own troubles as a kid. When you were acting out, when
you weren’t taking school seriously, when you were getting into trouble, did
getting yelled at help? What you really wanted—what you needed—was for
someone to see why you were doing these things. You needed someone to
guide you back to the right path and to help you realize the consequences of
being off it.
Patience and discipline. That was what you needed. So give those things
to your kids. They deserve it.
August 24
Be Something and Somebody
E. H. Harriman was a hell of a businessman and a surprisingly good father.
He had a reputation as a rapacious industrialist, but at home he was tender
and engaged with his kids. He was patient and he instilled in them good
values.
Once, he wrote to his son’s headmaster to ask how the boy was doing in
his schooling. “Fair in his studies,” came the reply, along with news that
young Averell was “gaining steadily.” Encouraged, he wrote to his son
asking whether he might be able to “jack up” his efforts in English. “I know
you can as well as some other subjects,” he wrote. “It is encouraging to
have you so improved, and I am sure you will catch on, and go on and on
and be something and somebody.”
That’s a perfect phrase. He wasn’t telling his son he needed to get perfect
scores. He wasn’t telling him that he was worthless for having come up
short. Or that success was necessarily about being better than anyone else.
Like Jim Valvano’s father, what the elder Harriman was saying was that he
knew what his son was capable of and, more important, what is expected of
a person with his potential: to be something and somebody.
We don’t necessarily need our kids to be financially successful or
supremely powerful or famous. But we do expect them to make something
of themselves—to be somebody, whether that’s a respected member of their
small church or the head of a legislative body. And we expect them to do
something, because life is a gift.
To waste it? To do the minimum? No, that’s failure for them and for us.
So let’s jack up our efforts and our expectations for them.
August 25
Are You Telling Them This?
As a young novelist, Susan Straight was told by her mentor, the great
James Baldwin, “You must continue to write. It is imperative.” Imagine
how different that was from the example she got from her own mother who,
as we discussed, believed her own creative life was over the day she had
kids.
The question we have to ask ourselves is: Which path are we choosing?
Are we telling them that they must continue to fulfill their potential—that
it’s imperative? Or through our actions (or inactions) are we telling them
the opposite? Have we unknowingly become dream killers, or are we
actively working as dream builders?
That’s the question. And it is definitely imperative.
There is no benefit to quitting on oneself. Sure, you might have to face
facts and choose one career path over another, but that’s not the same as
stopping. Making money from the thing you love to do is not as important
as getting better at it, as maximizing your potential.
As parents, it is imperative that we root for them, that we be fans. We
have to encourage them. We have to tell them to keep going. That there are
more, better things ahead. The world is going to put up enough stop signs,
erect enough obstacles, deliver enough heartbreak. We don’t need to add to
it. We need to do the opposite. We need to believe in them.
August 26
It’s Your Job to Check In
Nobody steals a scene on Seinfeld quite like George’s parents, Frank and
Estelle Costanza. And naturally, nobody makes George more miserable than
they do. They are a crazy, absurd set of parents.
In one episode, George has to make his weekly call to them, and it’s a
task he finds so onerous that he has to prepare things in advance to talk
about. The twist, of course, is that George’s parents dread the calls
themselves. “And every Sunday with the calls,” they finally complain.
In reality, this is precisely backward. Why is George checking in? That’s
his parents’ job.
Your kids didn’t choose this life; you did. What does that mean? It means
as your kids get older there should be none of that “Why don’t you ever
call?” nagging. That’s your responsibility.
That said, if you want the kind of relationship where your kids do call
and check in and share what’s going on with their lives, it starts when
they’re much, much younger. When you can’t just expect them to open up
and share with you. When you have to check in with them because they
don’t know that they’re struggling or that there’s anything worth sharing.
Kids simply don’t have the experience or the perspective yet to know one
way or the other.
When it comes to stuff like this, “just being there” is not enough. You
have to seek them out. You have to reach out. You have to gently pry them
open. You have to help them realize their own feelings. You have to be
more than there—you have to be proactive.
August 27
Other People Are Trying to Do This Too
The people you work with or for, or the people who work for you, also
have a life outside of work. Like you, they are a mother or a father, a son or
a daughter. Like you, they have kids and relationships and struggle to
balance them all. Like you, they are trying to put family first and to be a
fan.
The legendary NBA coach Gregg Popovich is a hard-driving boss, but he
does his best to try to help the people who work for and with him. His
former assistant coach Mike Brown tells the story of when he was going
through a separation. His two sons lived with their mom in Colorado but
were visiting him in San Antonio for a week. Brown took them to the
airport before he had to catch his own flight for an away game with the
Spurs. His boys were crying and begging to not have to get on the plane, to
be able to stay with their dad. Brown called Coach Pop to tell him he was
having some trouble and asked him to hold the team plane a few minutes.
Pop told Brown to stay with his kids. “No, no, no,” Brown said, “the kids
will be fine.”
“If you show up to this plane,” Pop told him, “you’re fired.” “Come on,
man! I’m going to be there.” Brown said. “Remember, if I see you on this
plane, you’re fired.” Click. Pop hung up on his assistant. Brown and his
boys missed their flights and spent three more days together.
Can you imagine what it would feel like to have someone do that for
you? Maybe not. But maybe you could make it feel a little more real by
doing it for somebody else.
August 28
Don’t Use Your Kids
Social media exploits one of the most vulnerable parts of our psyche: our
need to be seen and heard and validated. The brilliant programmers of these
networks have discovered how to reward this addictive impulse with Likes
and comments and follower counts. They turned our greatest vulnerabilities
into a game.
That’s what parents should be worried about. When you’re feeling
insecure and want to be validated, resist the urge to just post more photos of
your kid. Ask yourself: Is this really what my kid wants? Is this really
healthy or appropriate? Or is exploiting their cuteness just a cheap way to
get attention and feel better about myself?
Being a fan is not about showing them off or trying to impress people—
at dinner conversations or on social media. It’s not bragging about where
they go to college or how cute they looked dressed up for their birthday.
Our job is to take care of them, not exploit them. Don’t turn your kids
and the precious experiences you have with them into fodder for this
insatiable maw.
August 29
Teach Them to Be a Good Sport
How someone handles winning and losing reveals so much about their
character. The earlier kids are taught this, the more prepared they will be for
the real world (which includes plenty of both).
In his essay “On Anger,” Seneca lays out some specific advice for fathers
when it comes to teaching kids how to be good sports. He writes:
In contests with his comrades we ought not to allow him to
become sulky or fly into a passion: let us see that he be on
friendly terms with those whom he contends with, so that in the
struggle itself he may learn to wish not to hurt his antagonist but
to conquer him: Whenever he has gained the day or done
something praiseworthy, we should allow him to enjoy his
victory, but not to rush into transports of delight: for joy leads to
exultation, and exultation leads to swaggering and excessive self-
esteem.
This is important. We want our kids to possess the will to win, but not so
much that it possesses them. We want them to feel good when they win,
without being so dependent or addicted to that feeling that they are crushed
when, inevitably, they lose. We don’t want their success to fuel their ego, or
their shortcomings on the field to lead to insecurity or self-loathing.
It is, like all things, about balance. And most of all, about being
respectful, being responsible, and enjoying the process more than the
results.
August 30
This Is What It Takes to Thrive
Several years ago, the writer Malcolm Gladwell pointed out how
surprising it is that even in the NBA, which is filled with objectively
talented and elite athletes, it sometimes requires a team change or a head
coaching change (or a mental-skills professional) for a player to thrive.
They might have bounced around to two or three places, had multiple
disappointing seasons, and then suddenly, when the environment around
them is right, when they have the support they need, bam, they’re great.
His point was this: if even athletes being paid millions of dollars to
perform need this, how can we possibly just expect kids to succeed in any
old classroom we drop them into? We are so quick to write kids off—even
our own kids—as not good at math, as a so-so student, as having trouble
focusing or whatever. So quick!
But of course, environment is everything. The right supporting cast is
everything. Timing is everything. We have to be patient. We have to be
flexible. We can’t stop rooting for them, believing in them. We have to take
a page from these sports teams that, understanding they have a very
valuable asset on their hands, do not despair when things don’t immediately
click. No, when things aren’t working, they invest more. They don’t blame
the star. They blame the system . . . and then try to fix it. And the fans cheer
like crazy the whole time.
Well, our kids are even more priceless than any basketball player. And
their education is even more important than playing a game well.
August 31
Being a Fan Isn’t Easy
It was a time when women did not have jobs, let alone become published
authors. Not respectable women, anyway. And yet there Jane Austen’s
father was, submitting Jane’s writings to a publisher. “As I am well aware
of what consequence it is that a work of this sort should make its first
appearance under a respectable name I apply to you,” he wrote to the well-
known publisher Cadell, according to Claire Tomalin’s book Jane Austen: A
Life.
Being a fan of your kids is not just rooting for them at the occasional
soccer game. It’s not just telling them they’re special. It’s also putting
yourself out there, taking risks for them. It’s being willing to defy
conventions, to encourage them to defy conventions if they feel their calling
demands it.
You tried your whole life to raise a kid who is comfortable with
themselves, who is confident, who is competent, who could be successful.
When your efforts begin to bear fruit, real challenges will sprout up
alongside. As they push the boundaries of their comfort zone, they may
well push you out of yours. But that’s good! That’s what we want!
We have to believe in our kids. To be their fans. To be willing to risk with
and for them. If we don’t believe in our kids, who will? Be a real fan. It’s
not easy, but where would the world be if great parents had always taken
the easy route?
SEPTEMBER
RAISE A READER
(LESSONS IN LEARNING AND CURIOSITY)
September 1
This Is the Great Leveler
Not all of us are able to give our children riches. Or powerful connections.
Or even superior genetics. Does this mean our kids are at a disadvantage?
That they’re screwed? Nope. Because there is a great leveler out there—one
that we can show them and that they can use at any time.
The famous Princeton basketball coach Pete Carril would tell his young
athletes:
My father came from the province of León in Castile, Spain and
worked for thirty-nine years in the open-hearth for the Bethlehem
Steel Company. Every day, before he left for work, he would
remind my sister and me how important it was to be smart. “In
this life,” he would say, “the big, strong guys are always taking
from the smaller, weaker guys but . . . the smart take from the
strong.”
It’s simple fatherly wisdom: use your brain. It’s the secret weapon of
underdogs everywhere, available to all and always free.
September 2
This Is How You Teach Them
They say I tell a great many stories. I reckon I do; but I have learned from long
experience that plain people, take them as they run, are more easily influenced
through the medium of a proud and humorous illustration than any other way.
—ABRAHAM LINCOLN
If the Bible is any indication, Jesus rarely seemed to come out and say
what he meant. He preferred, instead, to employ parables and stories and
little anecdotes that made you think. He tells the story of the servants and
the talents. He tells the stories of the Prodigal Son, the Good Samaritan, the
mustard seed, and the lost sheep. Turns out, that’s a pretty effective way to
get a point across and make it stick.
And so it will be with your kids. We learn through stories—whether it’s
the story of Cincinnatus or a story about the time when you were their age.
We learn when people share moments of vulnerability, of their hard-won
experience. We don’t like it when people tell us the point; we like it when
they show us.
So stop thinking about giving them all the answers and start thinking
about stories to tell that make the answers self-evident. It’s the best way to
teach.
September 3
Introduce Them to the (Friendly) World of Ideas
Our first job, our first responsibility, is instilling a sense of learning, a sense of a
love of learning, in our kids.
—BARACK OBAMA
The Marine general and former U.S. secretary of defense Jim Mattis has
talked about his idyllic childhood in Pullman, Washington. There he spent
time outdoors, explored, got in trouble, and had an all-American childhood.
He talks lovingly of a house filled with books, run by parents who
encouraged their children not only to read them but to question and interact
with them as well. He recalls, “They introduced us to a world of great ideas
—not a fearful place, but a place to enjoy.”
What a thing to say! A target for each of us to aim for with our own
children.
You must teach your kids to be curious, to be open, to be willing to
explore. Your job is to teach them how to make their own informed
opinions, how to decide for themselves, how to be comfortable with
uncomfortable topics. Ideas are our friends. They will serve your children
well, and your children will serve them well, if you teach them early and
often.
The world is a place of great ideas. There is nothing to be afraid of . . .
except fear and ignorance.
September 4
Teach Them Early—When You Still Can
To learn is simply to allow something to be done to you, and to be quickly
persuaded is natural for those who are less able to offer resistance.
—PLUTARCH
We have to start teaching our kids the important things early, even when
it seems like they are way too young, because if we wait, they’ll be able to
fight us off. They’ll have the words and the resolve to resist the lessons that
we know they will need in life for the struggles they can’t see coming.
We have to get them while they’re still young and impressionable. We
have to push past their reservations. Of course they would rather play video
games. Of course it’s more fun to goof off. But now is the time. Before they
can fight us off with their full determination. Before the cement is
completely dry.
September 5
Do You Do This over Dinner?
He who cannot put his thoughts on ice should not enter into the heat of dispute.
—FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE
Some families watch TV at dinner. Some families eat separately. Some
families talk idly about their day. Dinner at Agnes Callard’s house is
different. She and her children debate.
Because Callard is a philosopher, many of their debates are
philosophical. If a conjoined twin committed a crime, should both twins be
punished? Is it possible for the other twin to be completely innocent? But
some of the topics are silly, such as the debate, led by her then seven-year-
old, on what would be the ideal type of glove.
It wasn’t the content of the debate that mattered, of course—it was the
activity. It was that they did it as a family. And like most great parenting
strategies, this wasn’t some forced or formal activity. It wasn’t an obligation
or a chore. These debates began as discussions between her and her
husband that her kids wanted to join. They evolved over time. The rules are
ad hoc; the tradition is organic. But in the end, it shaped the course of her
family and their intellectual lives.
Can you say the same about your dinners? Maybe you should talk about
it, then. Maybe even debate it.
September 6
How to Get Them to Read (or Do Anything)
A reader lives a thousand lives before he dies. The man who never reads lives
only one.
—GEORGE R. R. MARTIN
In her classic poem, “Tula [“Books are door-shaped”],” Margarita Engle
describes books as “door-shaped portals,” which is as apt as it is beautiful.
Books carry us across oceans and centuries, she writes, with the extra
benefit of making us feel less alone. Stephen King’s line was that books are
“uniquely portable magic.”
We want to give our kids access to this magic; we want them to walk
through these portals. We want them to read.
That said, we need to be providing a good example. How often do your
kids catch you reading? How often do they see you with a book in your
hands? You want them to read, but do you read regularly to them? You tell
them that books are important, that books are fun, but where is the
evidence?
If you want your kids to read more, if you want them to walk through
those magical door-shaped portals, show them what a reader looks like.
Talk to them about books. Make books a central part of your house . . . and
your lives.
September 7
The Lives of the Greats Remind Us
Why do we tell stories to our kids? Why do we tell them about history?
Teach them about Martin Luther King Jr., George Washington, Porcia Cato,
Cincinnatus, Florence Nightingale, Jesus, Marcus Aurelius? Because it
matters.
As Longfellow wrote,
Lives of great men all remind us
We can make our lives sublime,
And, departing, leave behind us
Footprints on the sands of time.
We are trying to teach our kids the most important and pressing lesson of
all: that they can make a difference, they can change the world.
We tell our kids stories to inspire them. That’s what bedtime reading is
about—not just tiring them out so they’ll go to sleep. The point of history
class isn’t to berate them with the evil deeds of old dead white guys. We
want them to know: People can have an impact. People can lead wonderful
lives. People can leave their footprints on the sands of time.
Not just people, not just heroes or the dynastically wealthy, but your kids
too. They can do this. And in helping them realize that, you are making
your own impact.
September 8
Are You Bringing This Home?
A child learns more in one split second, carving a little stick, than in whole days,
listening to a teacher.
—SIMÓN RODRÍGUEZ
Orville and Wilbur Wright were bicycle salesmen from Ohio. They
weren’t engineers. They didn’t go to college; they didn’t have any technical
training. Meanwhile, there were teams of engineers from the top
universities working on the same problem. One was funded by a grant from
the U.S. War Department.
How could the Wrights have possibly bested those deep pockets to
become the inventors and pioneers we know them as today?
“It began for them with a toy,” David McCullough writes in The Wright
Brothers, “a small helicopter brought home by their father, Bishop Milton
Wright, a great believer in the educational value of toys. . . . It was little
more than a stick with twin propellers and twisted rubber bands, and
probably cost 50 cents.”
It might not seem like a toy could change a child’s life, but of course it
can. Toys are more than just things to play with. They are worlds to
discover. They are things to be responsible for. They are things to take apart
and put back together. They are laboratories for life.
We spend a lot of time introducing our kids to the world of ideas. Let’s
also carve out some time to bring home cool toys. Toys with educational
value. Toys that teach them about other cultures. Toys that get them
interested in flight or science or math or history or technology. Toys that
are, in and of themselves, vessels for ideas.
Who knows what might come from their exploration of fun.
September 9
Teach Them to Notice
Pay attention. It’s all about paying attention. It’s all about taking in as much of
what’s out there as you can.
—SUSAN SONTAG
When former diplomat and secretary of defense Robert Lovett was a kid,
he and his dad took similar routes in the morning and evening to work and
to school. And the fact that they left both places at slightly different times
allowed Lovett and his dad to play an interesting game.
At night after dinner, according to biographers Walter Isaacson and Evan
Thomas, Lovett’s dad would ask questions about what he had seen. “ ‘How
many horses were pulling the cart?’ he would ask about a midtown
construction project. ‘How many girders were in the cart?’ ‘How were the
horses hitched to the cart?’ ” There would be a few quarters as a reward if
young Robert was right, but he could be docked a quarter from his winnings
if he got anything wrong.
This was more than just a silly activity they did together, although such
things are wonderful. What his father was teaching him was the art of
paying attention. Robert was learning to notice, to focus on the details and
not to take his surroundings for granted, to be present. It was a skill he used
to great advantage as he rose through the diplomatic ranks of the State
Department.
Of course, you don’t have to play the same game, but you can find your
own way to reward and inspire your kids to pay attention. The quarters and
the pats on the back they might win will be nice in the moment, but they
will pale in comparison to the value of the real gift you’ll have given them,
which will last them a lifetime.
September 10
“Beautiful” Is What They Say It Is
There is an old LEGO ad from the early 1980s. It has a little pigtailed
redhead holding her LEGO creation. What is it? Honestly, it’s hard to say.
It’s basically random blocks snapped together. One of the LEGO men has a
tree on his head. Needless to say, no architect would sign off on this project.
But the smile on this cute little kid’s face says it all.
“Have you ever seen anything like it?” the copy on the ad reads. “Not
just what she’s made, but how proud it’s made her. It’s a look you’ll see
whenever children build something all by themselves. No matter what
they’ve created . . . LEGO Universal Building Sets will help your children
discover something very, very special: themselves.”
As parents—as adults—it can be so easy to step in and tell your kids how
things are supposed to go. Trees don’t go on people’s heads! A window
doesn’t make sense there! But where will they sleep? Dogs and cats aren’t
friends! There is no air in space! We think that we are helping or that we
are teaching. But really we are stepping on their ability to create and
imagine. We may well be depriving them of that beautiful look of pride that
the little girl in the ad has—the one that comes from doing something all by
yourself. And discovering yourself in the process.
Playtime is for play. It’s supposed to be silly. It’s supposed to be fun.
There are no rules. None of it matters . . . unless they want it to matter. So
give them some space. Encourage them. Just watch. Let them be beautiful.
September 11
This Is How You Make Them Smart
I have no special talents, I am only passionately curious.
—ALBERT EINSTEIN
There is a story about Sandra Day O’Connor in Evan Thomas’s great book
First. “During one of Washington’s every-seventeen-years eruptions of
dormant cicadas,” he writes, “O’Connor collected a batch of the large, dead
insects and sent them in a shoebox to her grandchildren in Arizona.”
Her clerk was baffled. O’Connor explained: “One of the most important
things to me is that my children and grandchildren are curious. Because, if
you’re not curious, you’re not smart.”
We don’t have control over what kind of brain our kids are born with. We
don’t even really control what kind of college they get into. Are they a math
kid or an artist? Right-brained or left-brained? That’s not up to us. But what
we can influence is whether they’re curious. We can encourage this instinct
—asking them questions and rewarding them for asking their own. We can
cultivate this instinct until it becomes a personality trait—finding all sorts
of interesting things and showing them to our kids. And we can demonstrate
it—pouring fuel on the sparks of curiosity they exhibit by engaging with the
things we’re curious about too.
We can’t make them a specific kind of genius. But we can make them
smart . . . by showing them how to be curious.
September 12
This Is Something to Invest In
When I have a little money, I buy books; and if I have any left, I buy food and
clothes.
—ERASMUS
You work hard for your family. You know how you sweated for each
dollar, which can make those dollars hard to spend. Especially if you have
an eye toward investing—every dollar expended now comes at the cost of
returns in the future.
That’s one way to think about it, but it’s not the only way. Marcus
Aurelius wrote that what he learned from his great-grandfather was to
“avoid public schools, to hire good private teachers, and to accept the
resulting costs as money well spent.”
What Marcus was talking about is investing in your children’s education
—whatever form you decide it will take. A tutor to teach them Spanish a
couple times a month? A piano instructor? A yearly pass to the museum
downtown? The gas and the commute to the magnet school on the other
side of town instead of the closer but less rigorous one? Private tuition? One
parent working less so you can homeschool?
None of this is cheap. But don’t think of it as an expense. Think of it as
an investment. It’s the most important investment you can make—it’s an
investment in their knowledge, in their education, in their future. It’s
making them better. It’s worth what it costs.
September 13
You Have to Unlock This
It wasn’t until law school that future secretary of state Dean Acheson was
fully unlocked as a human being. There, he said, with the help of his
professors, he was introduced to a “tremendous discovery,” as he called it:
The discovery of the power of thought. Not only did I become
aware of this powerful mechanism, the brain, but I became aware
of an unlimited mass of material that was lying about the world
waiting to be stuffed into the brain.
It was this discovery that propelled Acheson to become not just one of
the top legal minds of his time but eventually the country’s principal
diplomat. Yet it’s also a little sad. He went to Groton School, Yale College,
and Harvard Law School. His parents were smart too. But somehow nobody
had been able (or interested?) to get him to realize the power of thought
until he was in his midtwenties? Unreal!
Just as we have to help introduce our kids to the world of ideas, we also
have to help them discover the incredible power of thought. We have to
give them a sense of the limitlessness of human potential trapped in those
three pounds of soft tissue between our ears. We have to show them what a
powerful mechanism they have been given; then we need to show them
how to use it.
We need to unlock their brains . . . as early as possible.
September 14
Not Just to Read, but to Read Critically
To read attentively—not to be satisfied with “just getting the gist of it.”
—MARCUS AURELIUS
An illiterate world is not a good one, but a world where people
unthinkingly believe and accept everything they read is not that much
better. So it’s great that you’re teaching your kids to read, but are you
teaching them to read critically?
They need to know: Authors can be wrong. Authors can be questioned. A
book is not a one-way conversation. It’s a dialogue between the reader and
the writer, between the past and the present. Show them how to take notes,
how to disagree, how to question what they see on the page, and how to
participate in the dialogue that has begun in the pages they are holding.
They need to know: No one book is definitive. No one school or system
has all the answers. Show them how to read books from opposing thinkers.
Read one book together . . . then read something that presents a different
point of view. Talk about the importance of debate, how to compare and
contrast. Teach them to be more than a reader, teach them to be a wide-
ranging, critical reader. A questioner. A reviewer. A thinker.
September 15
Protect This Impulse
The famed French photographer Henri Cartier-Bresson was a pain in the
ass to his teachers. He was bored by what they were teaching in school. He
didn’t pay attention. He was constantly getting caught reading something
that had nothing to do with his schoolwork, books that were often
inappropriate for his age.
One day, as he was about to start sixth grade, he was caught by the
principal reading Mallarmé or Rimbaud, two beautiful French poets. At
first, the principal seemed like he’d finally had enough. “Let’s have no
disorder in your studies,” he barked, using the informal tu. Every other time
Henri had been addressed this way, it had been followed with punishment.
But then the principal’s voice turned to kindness. “You’re going to read in
my office,” he said, and led the boy there, where Henri returned over and
over again as a precocious, curious reader for the rest of his school days.
It was this conversation—this little bit of intellectual guardianship and
protection of his curiosity—that helped Henri carve out the foundations and
freedom that would lead him to become one of the greatest photographers
in history.
We have to remember that our job as parents, as educators, is not to keep
our kids in line for its own sake. It’s not to crush their initiative because it’s
disruptive or uncomfortable or difficult for us. We have to encourage them.
We have to make space for our kids.
If they want to read? By God, let them! If they want to skip ahead or
deviate from the conventional path? Cheer them on! Who knows, they may
have just found their way . . .
September 16
It’s About the Right Moment
There is a select group of writers who are accessible to anyone, at whatever age
or stage of life—Homer, Shakespeare, Goethe, Balzac, Tolstoy—and then there
are those whose significance is not properly revealed until a particular moment.
—STEFAN ZWEIG
Maybe they can understand Ender’s Game at eleven, or maybe it won’t be
until they’re seventeen. Maybe they can get the message of The Great
Gatsby in high school, or maybe it’s something you’ll have to read as a kind
of family book club later on. Maybe they’ll take to poetry early, or maybe
they won’t. Maybe they’ll love The Little Prince or Charlotte’s Web as
much as you did, or maybe tonight is just not the night.
Stefan Zweig was twenty when he first picked up Michel de Montaigne’s
Essays—an incomparable book—but he had “little idea what to do with it.”
It wasn’t until the last year of his life, after two world wars and a forced
exile, that Zweig picked up Montaigne again. This time, the connection was
instant. The impact was enormous. Because the moment was right.
Remember, our goal here is to raise readers. But as with gardening, there
is a time and a season for certain things to take root, and until you get there,
the thing you’ll need most is patience.
September 17
You Gotta Give Them Access
The story of Theodore Roosevelt is the story of a small boy who read about great
men and decided he wanted to be like them.
—HERMANN HAGEDORN
Theodore Roosevelt certainly came from a privileged family. They were
rich, they were social elites, they had a mansion in Manhattan. Yet, as Doris
Kearns Goodwin wrote, his main advantage was actually pretty simple:
Few young children read as broadly or had such access to books
as young Roosevelt. He had only to pick a volume on the shelves
of the vast library in his family’s home or express interest in a
particular book and it would magically materialize. During one
family vacation Teedie proudly reported that he and his younger
brother and sister, Elliott and Corinne, had devoured fifty novels!
Thee [Theodore’s father] read aloud to his children in the
evenings after dinner. . . . Above all, he sought to impart didactic
principles of duty, ethics, and morality through stories, fables, and
maxims.
It would be wonderful if we could hand our kids a famous last name, a
legacy admission to Harvard, or a trust fund, but that is difficult to do. What
you can do—what you must do—is give them access to a library. To
unlimited numbers of books. Bring them up in a house that, if it lacks rich
heritage or fame or noble lineage like the Roosevelts’, is at least rich in a
love of reading.
September 18
The Two Most Important Skills to Teach Your Kids
Looking back on his surprise path to the presidency, one of Gerald Ford’s
main regrets came from the course of study he took in college. He would
write in his memoirs that if he could go back, the two main things he would
have studied were writing and public speaking. Writing well and speaking
confidently and articulately before an audience were the two main skills he
used in every facet of his life as a leader, and they were the two things he—
like most students—got the least instruction in.
With all that has changed since Ford went to college (class of ’35), how
little has happened to disrupt that. Nothing remains more important than
effective communication.
Kids learn dance in PE but pubic speaking and debate are optional,
extracurricular activities. How nuts is that? Kids are evaluated on
standardized tests  .  .  . as if effective communication can possibly be
captured via multiple choice. In fact, the questions and passages on
standardized tests are often the epitome of poor writing and ineffective
communication!
If schools aren’t going to do it, we parents have to. It’s on us to teach our
kids these important skills—to make sure they’re able to express
themselves on the page and in person. We’ve got to give them the
opportunities to get up and address an audience—and encourage the
confidence required to be comfortable doing so.
Whatever happens in the future, communication will be key (and king).
It’s your job to make sure they’re ready.
September 19
Let’s Get to the Bottom of It
How could youths better learn to live than by at once trying the experiment of
living? Methinks this would exercise their minds as much as mathematics.
—HENRY DAVID THOREAU
The author Susan Cheever tells a story of Henry David Thoreau, who
before he became a great writer was a teacher. The school he taught at was
close to a river, and it was a source of endless fascination to the kids,
mainly what made so many of the interesting sounds that came from the
water.
“It has been disputed whether the noise was caused by frogs,” one
student reflected later on. “Mr. Thoreau, however, caught three very small
frogs, two of them in the act of chirping. While bringing them home one of
them chirped in his hat.”
Isn’t that lovely? He didn’t just dismiss their question with an obvious
answer. He showed them how you go to the source of things—he showed
them the importance of following your curiosity. Thoreau was full of
demonstrations like that. For instance, he gave each student a small plot of
land and taught them how to survey together, how to grow plants, and how
to observe what was happening on their plots.
Yes, we’re busy. Yes, we know stuff. But we can’t just tell them what we
know. We have to show them. We have to roll up our sleeves, take off our
hats, and get to the bottom of stuff together.
September 20
Provide Them with This Unusual Advantage
More than three decades after their famous first flight, a journalist asked
Orville and Wilbur Wright how they did it. How did two brothers with “no
money, no influence, and no other special advantages” do what specialists
with all those advantages couldn’t do?
“It isn’t true,” Orville corrected, “to say we had no special advantages.
We did have unusual advantages in childhood, without which I doubt we
could have accomplished much.” What was their unusual advantage? “The
greatest thing in our favor,” Orville explained, “was growing up in a family
where there was always much encouragement to intellectual curiosity. If my
father had not been the kind who encouraged his children to pursue
intellectual interests without any thought of profit, our early curiosity about
flying would have been nipped too early to bear fruit.”
We have to do this too. We have to cultivate their curiosities, whatever
they may be. We have to encourage their interests, without any thought of
whether or not they might be able to profit from them.
We don’t have to be special, or specialists, to give them this unusual
advantage.
September 21
Raise Them to Be a “Why” Child
In F. Scott Fitzgerald’s short story “Head and Shoulders,” the young
prodigy Horace explains:
I was a “why” child. I wanted to see the wheels go around. My
father was a young economics professor at Princeton. He brought
me up on the system of answering every question I asked him to
the best of his ability.
A “ ‘why’ child”—what a delightful phrase! Isn’t that who we’re trying
to raise? A child who knows how to figure things out. A child who isn’t
content with taking things at face value, who isn’t satisfied with simple
explanations.
Can this be annoying? Absolutely. It can even get them in trouble. But
curious is better than complacent, and annoying is better than ignorant.
To be sure, there will be times when you’re too tired to answer their
questions. There will be other moments when you feel their questions are
inappropriate. But in those moments, you must pause and breathe and
remember that you have to seed this habit. You have to make sure you water
it too—and do your best never to stamp it out.
The more questions they ask, the better. Not just for you or for them but
for the world they live in.
September 22
Show Them What They’ll Get Out of This
The way to teach a kid to love books—as the great lover of books Robert
Greene has said—is by appealing to their self-interest. Show them what they
will get out of books. Tangibly. Immediately. Better yet, find them a book
that will have a big payoff for them.
President Joe Biden has talked about how reading earlier in his life about
the orator Demosthenes and his speech impediment helped him overcome
his own stutter—you think an experience like that, early on, doesn’t turn a
person into a reader for life? Find them books that will entertain them. That
will help them get their crush to like them. That will make them laugh. That
will piss their teachers off. That will help them learn a new skill or solve a
problem or feel less alone.
Focus on the ROI—because that’s what books are, investments. You put
down a few dollars, commit several hours, and you get something back. To
get your kids to read, you have to be a reader, of course, but you also have
to show them what they will get out of books. Or else why would they
bother?
September 23
Never Make Fun of Them for This
Your kids will do all sorts of ridiculous things. They will trip and fall, and
yes, you will sometimes laugh. You will tease them about this and that.
They’ll make hilarious mistakes. They’ll look back on their own childish
ridiculousness with amusement. Your family will have all sorts of inside
jokes.
This is fine. This is wonderful. It’s what binds people together—the
ability to bust each other’s balls, to share memories and experiences.
One biographer of Harry Truman noted that the former president
“mispronounced a reasonable number of words, which in the beginning
puzzled me. Then I realized that while he had often read them, he had
seldom, if ever, spoken them aloud, not even in many cases heard them
spoken aloud.”
It’s essential that your house and your relationship be a safe place for the
mispronunciation of words. Do not make them feel self-conscious about
reading, about tackling topics outside their comfort zone. This is how they
grow. Tease them and have fun about many things. But mispronouncing a
word? Respect it. Encourage it . . . and if you want to fix the problem, start
by expanding your own vocabulary!
September 24
Are You Showing Them How to Be a Student?
Live as if you were to die tomorrow. Learn as if you were to live forever.
—GANDHI
If you think back to when you were a kid, what appeared to you to be the
best part about being an adult? No more school. Our parents didn’t have to
carry around heavy books or do homework. We never saw them applying to
get into this school or that one. It’s sort of sad that, by and large, we show
our kids that education stops. That while adulthood isn’t always fun, one
perk is that you no longer have to go to class. That graduation is a final
destination.
It doesn’t have to be this way. There’s the story of Epictetus teaching one
day when a student’s arrival caused a commotion in the back of the room.
Who was it? Hadrian, the emperor. Hadrian’s example clearly had an
impact on his successor and adopted grandson, Marcus Aurelius. Late in his
reign, a friend spotted Marcus heading out, carrying a stack of books.
“Where are you going?” he asked. Marcus was on his way to a lecture on
Stoicism, he said, for “learning is a good thing, even for one who is
growing old. I am now on my way to Sextus the philosopher to learn what I
do not yet know.”
If you want your kids to value learning, if you want them to never stop
furthering the education you’ve been investing so much time and money
and care and worry into, then we have to show them what an adult
committed to lifelong learning actually looks like. We have to show them
we have not graduated, we are not on summer break, we have not arrived at
the final destination of education.
Wisdom, they must learn, is an endless pursuit.
September 25
Make Sure They Spend Time around Old People
In his book The Vanishing American Adult, former senator Ben Sasse
pondered what might strike a person from the distant past as odd about our
modern society. Aside from the technology, he said, they’d notice the
extreme age segregation. Invariably today, we spend time almost
exclusively with people our own age.
Our kids go to school with other kids. We work with other adults. Our
own parents and grandparents are shunted off to retirement communities
and old folks’ homes and cruise ships. The average age in the U.S. Senate,
where Sasse worked, is around sixty-one. There are only ten senators, as of
this writing, who are younger than him. The closest they get to young
people is summer interns, pages, and junior legislative aides.
When was the last time you stayed under the same roof as someone twice
your age? How many conversations do you have with people who grew up
without the things you completely take for granted?
In Lori McKenna’s song “Humble and Kind,” she talks about visiting
“grandpa every chance that you can.” But it actually requires more than
that, more than just seeing your own family. You have to make sure your
kids aren’t stuck in a bubble, living their lives away from anyone but other
children.
Instead, you have to expose them to wisdom. Expose them to people who
remember the good and the bad things that humans did in the recent and
not-so-recent past. Expose them to people who have learned painful
lessons. Expose them to people who have accomplished incredible things.
Otherwise all that wisdom might be lost, and so might your children.
September 26
It’s About Learning, Not Memorization
To know by heart is not to know.
—MICHEL DE MONTAIGNE
It’s time for us to review your multiplication tables, you tell them. Let’s
look over your vocab flash cards. Or maybe you’re one of those parents
who make their kids recite poems or plays, who sign them up for speech
competitions. Maybe you’re drilling them for a spelling bee right now.
It’s all making them smarter, you tell yourself. But is it? Or is it just
teaching them how to act smart?
We’re not trying to raise robots. We want kids who can think, who can
figure stuff out. Who cares what they can recite? We want them to know
what something means as much as we want them to know what it is. We
want them to love learning, not trivia! So make sure your priorities are
aligned. Make sure the activities you design actually get you closer to that
goal. Make sure you’re focused on the right stuff.
Teach them to know. That’s what counts.
September 27
What Game Are You Teaching Them?
There are two types of games in this life: finite and infinite. Finite games
are things you do once and then they’re over. An infinite game is more like
life itself—it goes on and on and everything is interrelated and independent.
The former is zero-sum, the latter is non-zero-sum.
Tobias Lütke, the founder of Shopify, tries to live life as an infinite game.
He also tries to make sure he doesn’t send mixed messages to his kids. We
talk to our children about education as an infinite game, he has said. We say
it’s about the love of learning, it’s a lifelong pursuit, it’s about developing
into the best person you can be . . . but then we send them off with strong
expectations of winning the finite game of first grade.
This sounds familiar, right? We’ve caught ourselves comparing our kids’
grades with other kids’. We’ve talked to other parents about what grade
level they’re reading or doing math at and what percentile they’re in
statewide. We’ve obsessed over GPA and standardized test scores as if they
were keys to the kingdom . . . of what exactly? Then we grill our college
kids about whether they found their major yet, about whether the major they
picked is going to snag them a high-paying job or not.
You want kids who are in this for life. You want kids who don’t think in
zero-sum terms. Teach them to play the infinite game. Teach them by
playing it yourself.
September 28
They Must Be Surrounded by This
No man has a right to bring up his children without surrounding them with
books.
—HORACE MANN
Do you know Lewin’s equation? You’re experiencing its implications as
you read this:
B = f (P,E)
Behavior (B) is a function of a person (P) and their environment (E). Our
habits, our actions, our lives, are determined by our surroundings.
What does this mean for us as parents? Well, we’re largely the architects
of our kids’ environment. We all have different means and ends, but within
those means we control what we surround our children with. The
influences. The colors. The moods. The people. The interactions. And of
course, the most important thing there is to a child’s intellectual
development: the books.
If you want them to be readers, you have to design the environment of a
reader, as an architect does. You have to surround them with books. Good
ones. Silly ones. Short ones. Long ones. Used ones. New ones. You have to
display them prominently in your house. You have to take your kids to
libraries and independent bookstores. Otherwise, how else could they
possibly become readers?
September 29
Don’t Baby Them When It Comes to Books
Modern books for children are rather horrible things, especially when you see
them in the mass.
—GEORGE ORWELL
Not long ago, kids were taught Latin and Greek so they could read the
classics . . . in their original languages. Think of Aesop’s Fables. Think of
children being read Plutarch’s Lives by their parents. This is heavy stuff.
And purposefully so. When you read old schoolbooks, what you’re really
doing is acquainting yourself with the obscure yet illustrative figures from
the ancient world, while also displaying a willingness to wrestle with
timeless and morally complex topics.
These days, the children and young adult sections of bookstores overflow
with infantilizing escapism, fantastical melodrama, and just plain absurd
nonsense. The curmudgeons among us want to blame millennials and Gen
Z for this. Their laziness and faltering tastes are why we’re awash in this
stuff.
But do you really believe our kids are dumber than the kids of Orwell’s
time? Or back before that? Of course not! They’re kids. We’re the problem.
Parents. Adults. Educators. Publishers. As a collective, we’ve stopped
believing our kids are capable of reading challenging books. So we provide
them with “kids’ editions” and silly picture books instead of helping them
build their reading muscles. Then we wonder why they can’t handle heavy
stuff.
Well, stop it. Push them. Push yourself. They aren’t babies. Or at least
they shouldn’t be after they’ve learned to read for themselves.
September 30
Do They Have a Project?
Mastery doesn’t come from rote recitation. It comes from falling in love
with something. It comes from hard work, sure, but only when the hard
work is aligned with a passionate love of a subject or a craft or a field.
Forget credentialing; give them something to sink their teeth into!
As Paul Graham wrote:
If I had to choose between my kids getting good grades and
working on ambitious projects of their own, I’d pick the projects.
And not because I’m an indulgent parent, but because I’ve been
on the other end and I know which has more predictive value.
When I was picking startups for Y Combinator, I didn’t care
about applicants’ grades. But if they’d worked on projects of their
own, I wanted to hear all about those.
If you want a kid who has real skills and real passion in this world, you’d
be well served to do the same.
OCTOBER
STRUGGLE AND EMERGE
(HOW TO RAISE THEIR RESILIENCE)
October 1
A Child’s Life Should Be Good, Not Easy
The Stoic philosopher Seneca got front-row seats to one of the worst
parenting jobs in history. In 49 AD, he was recalled from exile to tutor a
twelve-year-old named Nero. The ancient historian Cassius Dio tells us that
the boy’s mother, the empress Agrippina, had the entire empire under her
thumb and used her power to make sure her boy never had to struggle for
anything. She was what we today call a snowplow parent. And in clearing
the path of every conceivable impediment and obstacle, Agrippina created a
monster, one of the worst human beings in history.
It’s little mystery why we see Seneca write over and over again about the
importance of struggling with and overcoming adversity. The job of “the
good parent,” he says, is to “out of love for the child, [act] as a trainer,
endlessly manufacturing trials for the child.” The job of the good parent is
to make their child’s life good, not easy.
There is a great Latin expression, “Luctor et emergo.” It means “I
struggle and emerge” or “I wrestle with and overcome.” The gods, Seneca
writes, “want us to be as good, as virtuous as possible, so assign to us a
fortune that will make us struggle.” Without struggle, he says, “no one will
know what you were capable of, not even yourself.”
It is hard not to be a snowplow or helicopter parent. We love our kids so
much; we want nothing but the best for them. We can’t bear the thought, let
alone the sight, of their struggling. But we have to let them scramble
through the brambles and the pitfalls of growing up. We have to remind
ourselves day after day: a child’s life should be good, not easy.
October 2
You Can’t Prevent Them from Making Mistakes
In the novel Siddhartha, the title character tries desperately to convince his
son of the importance of the simple way of life, having learned the wisdom
of it through painful experience. Like you, like all parents, he watches as
his son ignores his warnings, despairing as he goes the wrong direction.
Confiding his frustration to his friend, Vasudeva, Siddhartha is hit with this
question:
“Do you really believe you have committed your follies so that
your son may be spared them?”
It would be wonderful if our kids didn’t have to learn through trial and
error, if they could simply accept our advice and start where we left off,
rather than touch the proverbial hot stove for themselves. But we should be
wise enough as human beings by now to know that is simply not how life
works. Much of what we learn has to be learned on our own. Some
mistakes have to be made to be fully understood. Don’t your own
experiences teach you that, anyway? How many of your parents’ warnings
did you really heed?
You can’t prevent your kids from making mistakes. You have to give
them the space to learn on their own. But you can take solace in the
knowledge that you’ve instilled the character, the awareness, and the
willingness to ask for help that they will need in order to bounce back from
the mistakes they will inevitably make.
October 3
This Is the Main Lesson
The chief task in life is simply this: to identify and separate matters so that I can
say clearly to myself which are externals not under my control, and which have
to do with the choices I actually control. Where then do I look for good and evil?
Not to uncontrollable externals, but within myself to the choices that are my own.
—EPICTETUS
There is a lesson underneath nearly everything we want to teach our kids.
It is a heady one . . . and yet also a very simple one. The lesson you have to
teach happens to be the core of Stoic philosophy, and also the key to
success in life: We don’t control what happens in life. We control how we
respond.
Your daughter thinks a teacher is unfair and doesn’t like them? Okay, that
very well might be true. So what is she going to do about it? The coach says
your son is too short to play basketball? Same thing. Screwed up and failed
a math test? There’s a bully on the playground? Only got into their safety
school? Same. Same. Same.
Teach your kids not to wallow in these misfortunes but to focus on what
is next. Guide them to put their energy toward their response. Because that’s
what’s up to them. That is the superpower they have. If you teach them that,
they have it.
October 4
Make Them Do Their Own Stuff
Sit and pray your nose doesn’t run! Or, rather just wipe your nose and stop
seeking a scapegoat.
—EPICTETUS
There is a great story about a young Spartan woman, Gorgo, who would
one day become queen. Despite her royal status, like all Spartans she was
raised to be self-sufficient, with no frills or needless luxury.
So imagine Gorgo’s surprise when she witnessed a distinguished visitor
to Sparta have his shoes put on by a servant. “Look, Father,” she said
innocently to her father, King Leonidas, “the stranger has no hands!”
Sadly, for some of us, it could just as easily be deduced that our kids have
no hands. And no brains. We put on their clothes for them. We make their
decisions. We clear the road in front like a snowplow. We hover like a
helicopter, just in case something goes wrong. We do everything for them.
Then we wonder why they are helpless. We wonder why they have
trouble with anxiety or low self-esteem. Confidence is something you earn.
It comes from self-sufficiency. It comes from experience. When we coddle
and baby them—when we take away their hands—we deprive them of these
critical assets.
It’s not right. It’s not fair.
October 5
Don’t Be Like This
In early 2021, the musician John Roderick was rightfully criticized by
parents all over the world for missing the point on how to teach kids.
His daughter was hungry. He was busy. She wanted to cook some beans.
He wanted her to figure out how to do it on her own. As he worked on a
jigsaw puzzle, she struggled to open the can of baked beans with a can
opener. She struggled and struggled and struggled. “Will you please just
open the can?” she said. He wouldn’t—wanting this to be a lesson. She kept
trying, he kept making suggestions (and tweeting about it). This went on
and on and on and on for six hours, until she finally opened the can.
Roderick was dubbed “Bean Dad” for his efforts. There’s a difference
between being a supportive parent and being a bean dad. There’s a
difference between letting your kid wrestle with difficulty so they can be
better for it and letting them fumble with a can so you can tweet a story.
No, our job isn’t to open every can for them. Nor is it to let them struggle
in the dark for six hours. Step in, show them how to be self-sufficient. Show
them how the damn can opener works! Start the can for them the first time
and let them take it from there.
Be a guide; don’t be a bean dad.
October 6
Help Them Forge This
Just as in fair weather, then, one ought to prepare for the storm, so also in youth
one should store up discipline and self-restraint as a provision for old age.
—PLUTARCH
Theodore Roosevelt spent almost every day during the first twelve years
of his life struggling with horrible asthma. The attacks were an almost
nightly near-death experience. He was bedridden for weeks at a time. Born
into great wealth and status, he could have remained weak and would have
been taken care of throughout his life. Then one day his father came into his
room and delivered a message that would change the young boy’s life:
“Theodore, you have the mind but you have not the body, and without the
help of the body the mind cannot go as far as it should.” Roosevelt’s
younger sister, who witnessed the conversation, recalled how the young,
fragile boy looked at his father and said with determination: “I’ll make my
body.”
It was the beginning of his preparation for and fulfillment of what he
would call “the Strenuous Life.” He worked out every day thereafter. By his
early twenties, his battle against asthma was over. Roosevelt had worked
that weakness out of his body.
Not everyone accepts the cards they are dealt. They remake their bodies
and their lives with activities and exercise. They prepare themselves for the
hard road. Do they hope they never have to walk it? Sure. But they are
prepared for it in any case.
Are your kids? Nobody is born with a steel backbone. It has to be forged.
Your job is to help your kids forge theirs.
October 7
Teach Them to Handle Things
Robert Lovett, the U.S. secretary of defense under President Truman, once
said, “You may think this is a small thing, but you’d be amazed at the
number of people [I] met in Washington during the war who had never
learned to handle anything by themselves.”
If you want your kid to stand out, if you want your kid to succeed, teach
them how to handle themselves, how to solve problems. That’s what will
make them one in a million. There are plenty of Ivy League kids who
struggle to make good decisions, to take care of business, to think and speak
clearly. There are geniuses out there who, quite frankly, will say and do
things that make you wonder how they manage to cross the street without
getting hit by a car.
This isn’t to say you should lower your sights. It’s to remind you to make
sure you’re aiming at the right thing. Degrees, fancy credentials, all the
right experiences? What does it matter if they aren’t self-sufficient, if they
can’t get things done?
October 8
You Have to Let Them Struggle
No parent wants to see their kids suffer. It’s almost more painful for you
than it is for them to trip over their words, to scratch their heads over their
homework, or to bumble their way through the early years of their career.
But if they never struggle, they can’t grow, they can’t learn, they can’t get
better.
Thomas Edison, a genius and a business success if there ever was one,
had trouble with exactly this issue. He was so brilliant, so headstrong, so
clear about what he wanted, that he could not quite give his sons room to
develop and learn. He couldn’t quite figure out the line between boss and
father.
His wife wrote him a great letter once that stands as advice to all parents:
You’ve made a success of your life, built up tremendous
industries successfully so you have nothing more to prove to the
world that you are capable—All know it—Can’t you be happy in
just letting the boys struggle along, with you to guide them. . . .
Forget a little bit that you are Charlie’s manager and be a father—
a big father!
Of course, it’s wonderful that you care, that you’d die for them if
necessary. But you have to forget a little bit—as Edison had to—just how
much you feel for them, so that they can learn. And in this way, you’ll save
them so much more suffering in the future.
October 9
You Have to Come Up with Challenges
A good half of the art of living is resilience.
—ALAIN DE BOTTON
Of course, you want tough kids. Kids who are active and resilient, who are
healthy and competent. You want them to be able to overcome obstacles
and to defend themselves, and with all that to always be prepared for the
ups and downs of life.
But you can’t just want tough kids. You have to make tough kids.
Theodore Roosevelt was famous for taking his kids on long walks and
leading them over boulders and through thick woods. He wanted to get
them used to exerting themselves and solving problems. Cato the Elder, the
great-grandfather of the towering Stoic Cato the Younger, a man who rose
through the ranks to become one of ancient Rome’s most politically
influential citizens, did the same thing. He trained his son Marcus “in
athletics, taught him how to throw the javelin, fight in armour, ride a horse,
use his fists in boxing, endure the extremes of heat and cold, and swim
across the roughest and most swiftly flowing stretches of the Tiber.”
You make kids tough by challenging them and teaching them the rewards
of those challenges. You make them tough by toughing things out, together.
October 10
Yet Don’t Be Too Tough
Many a tough parent has had to come to terms with the fact that each
child is different and needs different things. Cato the Elder had to do just
that with the challenges he designed for his son Marcus. As Plutarch writes,
he had to account for the fact that Marcus was his own person:
Since his body was not strong enough to endure the extreme
hardship, Cato was obliged to relax, a little, the extraordinary
austerity and self-discipline of his own way of life.
As it should be! We raise tough kids by teaching them—lovingly,
patiently, understandingly—how to grow past their limits. Still, we
acknowledge and respect those limits. We create challenges for them, but
we are not the challenge. No, we are their ally. We are on their team. We
love them. We’re working with and for them, not against them.
October 11
Be Like This
Do you remember the viral video of a little four-year-old Iranian boy
named Arat Hosseini trying to do box jumps? Arat tries and fails nine
times. Then, his dad, Mohamed, enters the frame and gives his son a pep
talk. On the very next attempt, Arat lands the jump. On top of the box, he
double fist pumps before jumping into his father’s arms.
This is what “Luctor et emergo”—“I struggle and emerge”—is all about.
It is not about pointless struggle. It’s about being by their side, encouraging
them, picking them up when they fall, telling them what they need to hear
when they need to hear it. It’s being like Mohamed the box-jump dad, not
John Roderick the bean dad.
October 12
Teach Them That They Decide the End of Every Story
When Vice Admiral James Stockdale was shot down over Vietnam, he
was taken prisoner by the North Vietnamese. He spent nearly eight years
being tortured and subjected to unimaginable loneliness and terror. He had
little choice in the fact that he was shot down or that he was taken prisoner.
When asked how he made it out alive, he said:
I never lost faith in the end of the story, I never doubted not only
that I would get out, but also that I would prevail in the end and
turn the experience into the defining event of my life, which, in
retrospect, I would not trade.
What Stockdale told himself—and what helped him endure this terrible
ordeal and others—was that he possessed an incredible power. He could
decide how he was going to use this experience in the rest of his life,
however short or long it would be.
Teach them that. Teach them to see hardship as fuel. Teach them to see an
opportunity where others see an obstacle. Teach them that despite
everything outside their control, they retain an incredible power: the power
to choose what they do with what happens to them. They get to decide what
role an event will play in their life. They have the power to write the end of
their own story.
October 13
Make Them Prove It
In his wonderful book Outdoor Kids in an Inside World, Steven Rinella
tells a story about taking his kids camping in Montana. One of his kids
confidently claimed to have spotted a scorpion. When Steve didn’t believe
him, the child got increasingly upset, convinced that he had, in fact, seen
one. “I told him the only way he would change my mind,” Steven writes,
“is by bringing me a scorpion, which seemed like a perfectly safe and
reasonable thing to say since we all know there are no scorpions in
Montana.”
Every parent who has challenged their kids on those impossible kinds of
claims knows what happened next. Within minutes, the kids were back with
two scorpions on a rock. “A quick Google search revealed that we were
beholding two specimens of Montana’s only scorpion species, the northern
scorpion, which is mostly found around rimrock areas in the Yellowstone
Basin. It was news to me.”
We all learn the hard way to be credulous of what our kids claim. Even if
they are wrong a lot, the one time they’re not, it will cost you. But that
doesn’t mean they should have it easy. Make them do the work. Make them
prove it. Make them track the scorpion down. Make them find some
evidence, give a detailed description, build the case. Better yet, do it
together. You’re teaching them to show their work, to support their position,
to convince and persuade . . . and you’re keeping them busy in the process.
October 14
Pain Is a Part of Life
Even though you have these powers free and entirely your own, you don’t use
them, because you still don’t realize what you have or where it came from. . . . I
am prepared to show you that you have resources and a character naturally strong
and resilient.
—EPICTETUS
Oh, how you wish you could guarantee they will never suffer. Of course,
you know that’s not possible. As the character in Hermann Hesse’s
Siddhartha says, we cannot spare our kids the suffering we have gone
through in our lives. We cannot prevent them from suffering altogether.
Because suffering and pain are parts of life.
As a parent, the goal is to raise kids tough enough—loved enough—to
deal with what life is going to throw at them. We don’t want them to suffer,
but when suffering comes (and it is definitely coming), we want them to be
able to endure its initial shock, navigate its ups and downs, and then learn
from its consequences.
Think about that today. Think about toughening your kids up; think about
preparing them for an uncertain future. Because that is the one thing we
know for certain. Things are going to be tough. Things will go wrong. More
pandemics and emergencies and recessions and heartbreak lie ahead. Our
kids are going to have to be ready for it . . . and it’s on us to make sure they
are.
October 15
Courage Is Calling
In 2006, Benjamin Mee bought a zoo. Literally a zoo. It was broken down
and in desperate need of a caring owner. Mee and his family were
struggling too. Things hadn’t been going well for them either. But Mee
explains to his son—in a scene immortalized by Matt Damon in the movie
version of Mee’s book, We Bought a Zoo—that our lives are defined by the
moments when we put ourselves out there:
You know, sometimes all you need is twenty seconds of insane
courage. Just literally twenty seconds of just embarrassing
bravery. And I promise you, something great will come of it.
This idea of breaking courage down into little pieces is a very good one
for us parents to pass on to our own kids. A person isn’t brave, generally.
We can be brave only specifically in the moment. This is as true for us and
our kids or Benjamin Mee’s son as it is for the most decorated soldiers who
have ever served in the military.
If you read the citations for many Medal of Honor recipients, for
instance, the action that rises to the level of heroism is almost always just a
moment. It’s usually not fighting off twelve insurgents for five hours—it’s
sprinting across an open plain for twenty seconds, exposed to enemy
gunfire on three sides, to come to the aid of a fallen comrade.
Just literally twenty seconds of insane, embarrassing bravery. That’s what
courage is. So teach them how to find those few seconds of courage. Tell
them something great will come of it. Promise them.
October 16
There Is Good in Everything
Parenthood can feel like one tough situation after another. One kid is sick.
The other is struggling in school. You just got a call from your neighbor
telling you that your son was caught throwing rocks at their house
yesterday. Your daughter is being bullied. It looks like the whole family is
going to be super late to today’s soccer game.
Ugh. It’s frustrating. It’s overwhelming. It can feel so negative.
What we need to remember in moments like this is that line from Laura
Ingalls Wilder:
There is good in everything, if only we look for it.
If we, as parents, look at everything being thrown at us as problems, as a
burden, we are going to get burned out . . . fast. But if, instead, we can see
the good in each of these issues, if we can focus on the opportunity within
each obstacle, not only will we be more likely to make it through, but we’ll
be better parents for it.
October 17
Help, but Don’t Make Them Helpless
There is so much to do. Your kids have to get dressed. They have to eat.
They have go to school. They have to do well in school. They’ll need jobs.
They’ll need to figure out how to find a home, find a spouse, navigate the
difficulties of the modern world.
There is so much to do . . . and they are so bad at all of it. So how does a
parent get involved without crossing the line? How do we know where to
help, what to handle for them, what to tell them they don’t have to worry
about? Of course, there are no rules. No one can give you a perfect list: Pay
for their college, but not their car. Cook them food, but don’t do their
homework for them. Clean the kitchen, but not their room.
So maybe instead we should look for a good principle to follow instead.
Perhaps we can adapt Plutarch’s line about leadership:
A parent should do anything, but not everything.
A great leader is never above rolling up their sleeves. Like a great parent,
they’ll do anything for their family or their organization. But they also
know they can’t do everything. It’s not good for them or for anyone else.
October 18
Teach Them That It’s Figureoutable
The impediment to action advances action. What stands in the way becomes the
way.
—MARCUS AURELIUS
There’s a story that occurs constantly in the biographies of creative and
brilliant people. It goes something like this: As a kid they have a question—
maybe it’s about how car engines work, or what Antarctica is like. It
doesn’t matter what the question is about, really—history, science, animals
—because their parents all have the same response. They say, “I don’t
know, but let’s go figure it out!” So they go to the library or the hardware
store or the computer and they dig around until they find the answer.
What this experience did for the young versions of these notable figures
was instill in them a few essential lessons that would then set them on their
paths: (1) their parents actually listened and cared; (2) curiosity is the
starting point of a great adventure; and (3) there are places, like the library
or the internet or some wise old neighbor, where answers can be found.
Most important, though, they learned something well expressed in the
title of Marie Forleo’s book: Everything Is Figureoutable. Problems can be
solved. Ignorance can be eliminated. Answers can be tracked down. The
unknown can be made familiar. Things can be discovered.
Show them how this works. Point them to the library or the laptop, the
telephone or their science teacher. Teach them that everything is
figureoutable. Big and small.
October 19
Teach Them That It’s Figureoutable, Part II
When Charles Lindbergh was thinking about attempting the first
transatlantic flight, he ran into an issue: he honestly didn’t even know how
long the distance was.
There is an incredible exchange in his memoir about the flight, where in
the early preparation Lindbergh is talking with a mechanic about his plan to
go from New York to Paris by a certain route.
“How far is that?” one of them asks.
“It’s about 3,500 miles. We could get a pretty close check by scaling it
off a globe. Do you know where one is?”
“There’s a globe at the public library. It only takes a few minutes to drive
there. I’ve got to know what the distance is before I can make any accurate
calculations. My car’s right outside.”
Lindbergh was a guy who knew how to solve his own problems by
figuring stuff out. Lindbergh and his partner end up taking a piece of string,
stretching it from New York to Paris across the curve of the globe, and then
measuring it against the key. They got it pretty damn close too, close
enough for him to survive the flight.
We don’t have to solve our children’s problems for them. We don’t have
to teach them how to memorize things. What we have to do is teach them
how to help themselves. We have to show them that everything is
figureoutable.
October 20
Be Careful How Helpful You Are
In 2016, Jeannie Gaffigan found out she had a tumor in her brain the size
of a pear. It was quite possible she would die, but if she didn’t, her recovery
would be long and painful and she might never be the same. It was an
incredibly difficult time for the Gaffigan family. In an interview, she
explained just how afraid she was that her family would not be able to
function or survive without her:
I was, like, being wheeled into the OR being like, “My computer
password is,” you know, “The Fresh Direct password is.” I was
like, there’s just too much to impart. And as I was recovering, I
realized that doing everything for people completely robs them of
their ability to function. And so there were two things there. It
taught me I was overcontrolling my life, my people, and my kids.
And secondly, it should be that they’re just fine on their own.
They don’t need the boot camp that I was running.
Of course, the lesson here is not that you or your kids’ coparent is not
important. That would be absurd. What Jeannie realized is that by holding
on too tight, by being so helpful, she was actually holding them back.
“There I was, useless,” she said, “and everybody was okay. Everyone was
fine. They were better. And Jim—stuff came out of him that he never had
before. And things blossomed in my kids, and I watched it from afar. They
didn’t need me, but they kind of did.”
October 21
Make Them Find Out for Themselves
It would be easy to give them all the answers. It’s even fun to give them the
answers. It would make things go faster and more smoothly and let you get
back to what you were doing. But you can’t. You just can’t.
We’ve said before that the goal is to raise kids who know how to figure
things out. What does that mean? It means you have to let them figure
things out.
The philosopher John Stuart Mill would recall that in his own unique
childhood education, which was supervised by his father, “anything which
could be found out by thinking I was never told, until I had exhausted my
efforts to find it out for myself.” It’s not that his father never helped him—
like some homeschooling bean dad—it’s that he encouraged his son to take
a crack at it first. More than encouraged—he let him struggle with it, let
him not know until he either learned or learned how to learn. The boy had to
try and fail before he came to the rescue.
Luctor et emergo, remember? I struggle and emerge? We have to make
them understand that they have what it takes to do this on their own, and if
they don’t, the best way to get it is to develop it by experience, by curiosity
and exploration. We hold some of our answers back not because we don’t
love them but because we love them so much. We let them struggle because
we believe in them and because we believe even more in what will come
out the other side.
October 22
How You See It Matters
Choose not to be harmed—and you won’t feel harmed. Don’t feel harmed—and
you haven’t been.
—MARCUS AURELIUS
There are things that nobody ever wants to happen—especially to their
kids. Whether it’s breaking an arm or being bullied, life visits things upon
us. Things that frustrate, things that hurt, things that cause problems.
While we’d never choose for these things to happen, we have to
remember that when they do happen, we still do retain some choice: as
James Stockdale did upon his descent into the North Vietnamese jungle, we
choose how we see these difficult events. We choose the story we tell
ourselves about them.
The power of this idea—whether it was embraced or rejected—revealed
itself in the attitudes of parents during the pandemic. Too many parents
chose to see that their children had been harmed, be it by distance learning
or by not seeing their grandparents. Of course, these events were
undesirable. And there were consequences. But “harmed”? This is a
subjective word. This is a choice.
Will your children be affected by things that happen? By having to
change teachers midyear because of a move? By having glasses? By a
divorce? By their learning issues? Yes. It would be dishonest to claim
otherwise. But negatively affected? That’s up to you. Because how you
decide to see it and, more important, how you choose to respond are going
to determine how your children perceive these events as well.
October 23
Don’t Start This for Them
General H. R. McMaster and his millennial daughter jokingly refer to her
peers as the “start-my-orange-for-me generation.” Meaning the kids she
grew up with can’t even peel an orange without having their parents get it
going first. And now as adults they suffer for it. Because for as long as
they’ve been conscious of it, their parents have been doing stuff like that for
them. Whether it was science fair projects started the night before or
arguing with teachers over (bad) grades they’d rightfully earned or funding
the down payment for a house they couldn’t afford, McMaster’s daughter
was surrounded by learned helplessness.
There are lots of reasons for this snowplow, helicopter parenting style:
narcissism, fear, insecurity, economic uncertainty, and, of course, real love.
Regardless of the emotion behind it, the effect is the same.
Our goal is to raise self-sufficient kids. So let them peel their own
oranges. That doesn’t mean just let them struggle like the bean dad; it
means teach them. It means encourage them. It means set expectations for
them. It means let them go off on their own.
October 24
They Can Still Be Successful
Yes, it’s true: many of the most successful artists and entrepreneurs and
world leaders came from horrible circumstances. Adversity shaped and
formed them, even fueled them to greatness.
Does that mean that, because you remain happily married and you are
able to put your kids into good schools and new clothes, they are somehow
disadvantaged? Hardly!
“It has been suggested [that an unhappy childhood is necessary] for
greatness,” the dancer and writer Agnes de Mille wrote in her biography of
Martha Graham. “Possibly. Yet many childhoods are unhappy without
producing anything attractive, one almost-certain result being trouble in
life.”
The reality is that successful people come from all sorts of backgrounds.
Franklin Delano Roosevelt had loving parents. Churchill did not. They both
reached the same heights . . . and though they both struggled to do it well,
they each sought to provide good, stable, and loving homes for their own
children.
Creating a happy childhood for our kids is the whole point of what we’re
trying to do here. Don’t second-guess yourself. Their lives should be good.
Just remember that good is not the same as easy!
October 25
Nobody Likes What Is Spoiled
There is a certain beauty in the child, the beauty of innocence and docility. But
there is nothing beautiful about a spoiled child.
—DOUG MCMANAMAN
There is nothing more lovely and more wonderful than a child. Their
laugh. Their joy. The cute things they say. But like every sweet thing, it can
easily turn sour.
You’re not doing your kids any favors by giving them everything they
want. You’re not helping them by removing every difficulty and preventing
all adversity. You’re not making their lives easier by fighting all their
battles. You’re not rewarding them by overindulging them.
No, you’re spoiling them. And you’re not doing much of a service to the
world in the process, either. Instead, you are setting your kids up for a very
tough and unpleasant time in this life. You are, in fact, making them very
weak and very unpleasant.
Don’t spoil them. All things in moderation, even as you love them as
much as humanly possible. It’s a difficult balance, to be sure, but the stakes
are too high not to get it right.
October 26
Don’t Deprive Them of This
All of humanity’s problems stem from man’s inability to sit quietly in a room
alone.
—BLAISE PASCAL
Our instinct is to make sure every second of our kids’ time is filled.
They’ve got school. And swim practice. And guitar lessons. And scheduled
playdates. We tell them to go play outside. To read or do their homework or
practice their instrument. We ask them what they want to do next. We are
always forcing or encouraging them to do something, anything.
This is usually all very well-intentioned. But it is depriving them of a
very important skill in life: the ability to be alone. To sit with their own
thoughts. To entertain themselves. To get comfortable with boredom.
Some kids are extroverts. Some are introverts. But every kid needs to
know how to be alone and to be happy in that space. There are lots of
opportunities for you to help them develop this ability, depending on their
age and personality, of course. When they start stirring in the morning,
don’t rush in. When they’re quietly playing in their room, take a step back.
Let them be bored. Let them lie around for a little while after school or on
the weekend. Let them have some time with themselves so they might
cultivate some independence.
It’s a critical part of life (as every adult knows). Those who lack the
ability to sit quietly in a room alone are miserable and prone to addiction
and overstimulation. So teach them now. Or, more accurately, give them the
space to teach themselves.
October 27
Let Them Know About Your Battles
Major Taylor was the greatest cyclist of his generation. Born black in
America in 1878, if Major was to fight his way to the top of his sport, he
would have to fight his way through brutal racism and unfairness to do it.
The dual battles took their toll on Taylor. In the end, he lost not only his
fame and fortune but the family he loved too. He died alone, penniless, and
estranged from his young daughter, Sydney.
As Michael Kranish writes in The World’s Fastest Man, for many years
Sydney just thought her father had failed her, and naturally, she was angry
at him. “Sydney had been bitter at what she interpreted as her father’s
rigidity and aloofness. Only later, she said, did she truly understand the
strains he had faced—the physical one of racing for decades, and the mental
one of battling racism. The combination, she believed, had slowly killed
him.”
Sydney didn’t know her father’s battles. Those battles weren’t his
fault . . . but his failure to talk to her about them was. We all struggle. There
has never been a parent (or a human being) who didn’t have their own
battles. If we don’t explain this to our children, if we can’t be vulnerable or
honest with them, there will forever be an unbridgeable gap between us. We
will lose time and connection that we can’t ever get back.
All of us will lose what Sydney and Major lost: a chance to support each
other, to understand each other, to learn from each other’s struggles, and to
be loved and fully appreciated by each other.
October 28
You Can Survive Anything
It was the best of times, it was the worst of times.
—CHARLES DICKENS
We doubt ourselves as parents. Not just sometimes but all the time. We
wonder if we’re doing enough, if we’re doing things right, if we have what
it takes to raise good kids.
Well, we can put that to rest. The COVID-19 years have settled the
matter.
You have been through the wringer. You have been through the crucible.
And you’re still here.
You got through it. You did your best. You may have stumbled but you
never gave up. You might be exhausted from it—how could you not be—
but you have also gained incredible strength from it.
Seneca talks about how the real object of pity is the person who has
never been through adversity. Those of us who have? It wasn’t easy, but at
least we know now what we’re capable of.
If you ever wondered if you have what it takes . . . now you have proof.
You do.
October 29
You Have to See It This Way
If you haven’t heard the famous Jocko Willink “Good” speech, you should
listen to it as soon as you have a chance. Because his Navy SEAL mentality
doesn’t just apply to warfare; it doesn’t just apply to entrepreneurship or
leadership. It is also a prescription for parenting. In fact, we might easily
adapt it as a personal mantra to some of the daily troubles we face as
parents day in and day out.
Oh, my kid woke up sick this morning? Good, we’ll spend the day at home together.
The take-out order got canceled last minute? Good, we’ll have breakfast for dinner.
You caught your kid lying? Good, now you have an opportunity to talk about honesty.
Pulled over for speeding? Good, show your kids how you handle owning a mistake.
Business in trouble? Good, talk to them about grace under pressure.
Flight delayed? Good, have fun in the airport as a family.
Traffic? Good, you get more time with them.
They are struggling in math class? Good, time for you to brush up on your algebra.
Your kids are counting on you. You don’t get to despair. There’s no time
to complain. No one is going to come take this problem off your hands. It’s
on you. It’s what you were given by fate or chance, and now you’ve got to
work with it. You’ve got to make something of it.
You have to make it good . . . for them.
October 30
Give Them This Great Power
When she was about thirteen years old, Condoleezza Rice came home
heartbroken because a classmate had gotten up and moved seats, refusing to
be seated next to a black girl. You might have expected her parents to
comfort her, to tell her that America still had a long way to go, and to assure
her that she was just as good as everyone else. Indeed, they may have done
those things, but her father also chose in that moment to give his daughter
some pretty counterintuitive advice: “It’s okay that some close-minded
person doesn’t want to sit next to you, as long as they are the one that
moves.”
Instead of making his daughter feel like a victim, he empowered her. He
gave her a great gift in that moment—it was a gift of dignity and strength.
Yes, he was telling her she couldn’t control what other thoughtless or mean
people did. She could, however, decide not to let it affect her, not to let it
change how she lived her life or how she went about her own school day. If
some racist kid (with racist parents, obviously) wanted to change where
they sat, that was their choice. But she didn’t have to bend or be changed by
it. She didn’t have to let it get to her.
They can move. She didn’t have to do a thing. That was her power. Your
kids should know they have that power too.
October 31
Don’t Be One of Those Parents
A helicopter parent hovers. They refuse to let their kid out of their sight.
They follow them on the playground so they never fall down. They don’t let
them ride their bike to a friend’s house so they never get lost. They make all
their kids’ decisions for them. They check in constantly with their teachers
to make sure everything is going according to plan. Their plan.
A snowplow parent doesn’t hover; they drive out in front of their kid,
clearing the road of every conceivable impediment and obstacle between
adolescence and . . . retirement? Their kid’s, not their own.
Coach doesn’t think their kid is good enough to be the star player?
They’ll start their own team. College applications? They’ve got it handled
—even if it means bending the rules or breaking the law. At great pain and
expense, their kid will never have to struggle, stumble, or be rejected.
Needless to say, neither of these approaches is likely to produce what
every good parent wants: self-sufficient, happy, and well-adjusted children.
Even though many helicopter and snowplow parents come from a good
place—they love their kids so much that they want nothing but the best for
them—they are actively doing harm.
Your job is to be there for your kid, not to be their everything. Your job is
to teach your kid, not to prevent them from ever failing. Yes, you have to
keep them safe, but not at the cost of keeping them sheltered. Not at the
expense of life itself.
NOVEMBER
GIVE THANKS AND BUILD BONDS
(LESSONS IN GRATITUDE AND CONNECTION)
November 1
Parenthood Is a Bond We All Share
All of our fellow animal creatures, as Aristotle observed long ago, try to stay
alive and reproduce more of their kind.
—MARTHA NUSSBAUM
You love your kids more than anything. They are so special to you. Your
eyes close when you think about them. Your heart softens. There is nothing
you wouldn’t do for them. There is no one who means more.
Think about them for a second. Do you feel that radiating warmth? Do
you feel it washing over you? You just want to hug them, right? Maybe you
even want to cry. That’s what being a parent is.
Now take a minute to consider the many people with whom you share
that feeling. Consider how basically every single person, even murderers on
death row, even the rude person who just shoved you in the supermarket,
even the billionaire you think is destroying our political system, has that
same feeling about their kids. Run it backward and forward too. Cleopatra
felt that way about her daughter. Frederick Douglass felt it about his sons.
So too did billions of ordinary people in small towns and caves and ships on
stormy oceans.
Being a parent is something special. It’s also something that is nearly
universal. We might be kinder and more forgiving and find more common
ground if we could just remember that a little more often.
November 2
You’d Trade Anything for This, Yet . . .
When Kobe Bryant took off in his helicopter from downtown Los
Angeles on January 26, 2020, he was a five-time NBA champion. He was a
two-time finals MVP. He was a two-time Olympic gold medalist. He had
won an Emmy and an Oscar and he was a New York Times–bestselling
author. He had earned hundreds of millions of dollars in his career and
raised a venture capital fund of more than $100 million.
Yet it goes without saying that he would have traded all of those things
for just one more day as a dad to his four girls. And you would do the exact
same thing.
Who wouldn’t?
We know this. If asked, we would say it. You would say it, right? Yet . . .
yet . . . yet . . . look at your choices. You’d give up so much for one more
bedtime with your kids, and here you are, on your phone while they’re in
the bath. No amount of money could compensate you for one more morning
with them, and here you are, grouchy because it’s early, put out because
you’re sitting in traffic as you drive them to school.
You have, right now, in your grasp, the thing that Kobe Bryant would
have traded anything for. Do. Not. Waste. It. Be grateful for it.
November 3
This Is Something to Be Glad About
It can be hard to express your feelings as a parent sometimes. Not so much
because parents are expected to bottle up their emotions but because the
emotions that come with being a parent can be so overwhelming and
complex. It’s a rush of a million feelings: love, joy, fear, absurdity,
exhaustion, responsibility, motivation, and primal attachment.
No one prepared you for any of this . . . and it’s unlike anything you’ve
ever dealt with before. How do you express it? How do you let your family
know what they mean to you? How they have you wrapped around their
finger, how they are your everything?
Maybe this exchange from The Boy, the Mole, the Fox and the Horse will
suffice.
“Sometimes I want to say I love you all,” says the mole, “but I
find it difficult.”
“Do you?” says the boy.
“Yes, so I say something like I’m glad we are all here.”
I’m glad we are all here. Isn’t that the perfect way to capture how you
feel? Joy and gratitude that you’re together, that this is happening. That’s
something to be glad about. That you have each other. That we’re all here,
right now, despite it all.
November 4
You’ve Been Graced
Charles de Gaulle had a hard life. He was a POW in World War I. He had
to flee France in order to save it in World War II. He endured protests and
assassination attempts. He also had a daughter named Anne, who was born
with Down syndrome. In 1928, when she was born, this was not something
people knew how to deal with—disabled children were often sent away to
institutions. Parents were made to feel ashamed, as if they were responsible
for having, in the language of the day, a “retarded” child.
But not de Gaulle and his wife, Yvonne. They embraced their daughter.
They built their lives around the challenging but rewarding experience of
raising her. “Her birth was a trial for my wife and myself,” he said. “But
believe me, Anne is my joy and my strength. She is the grace of God in my
life. . . . She has kept me in the security of obedience to the sovereign will
of God.”
Each of our children is different. Each comes with their own limitations,
challenges, and personality. Whether they are seriously handicapped, have a
minor learning disability, or bring into our lives this or that, it doesn’t
matter. We have been graced. They are a blessing, an opportunity for us to
change and grow; they give us joy and something to throw ourselves into.
November 5
Are You Teaching Them Gratitude?
Your kids should be grateful. Not to Mom and Dad, of course; you’re just
doing your job. You’re legally and biologically obligated. Your kids should
be grateful for everything. We all should. It’s amazing that any of us are
alive at all. The odds are astronomically small that we are here, that we are
us.
So it’s important that you teach your kids about gratitude. Jason Harris,
the CEO of Mekanism—an award-winning ad agency—and the author of
The Soulful Art of Persuasion, has an interesting practice for persuading
your kids to have a more grateful outlook about life. As he writes:
Every Sunday night we write down in our book three things for
which we are individually grateful. I know this is not an earth-
shattering idea.  .  .  . But this practice has made a world of
difference for me and my kids. It resets you and gets you prepped
for the week ahead.  .  .  . What’s helpful about writing these
reflections in a notebook is that you can consult previous entries
and jog your memory on truly trying days. . . . Keeping thoughts
of gratitude on the surface of your mental life can help you realize
that whatever might be going wrong today, on balance we all
have a ton to be positive about.
Beautiful. And how much more beautiful would the world be if more of
us took up this practice with our own kids?
November 6
It’s Always a Blessing
A writer—and, I believe, generally all persons—must think that whatever
happens to him or her is a resource.
—JORGE LUIS BORGES
The thing about being a parent is that it gives you superpowers—or at least
a superpower. Nothing too special. You can’t fly. You can’t stop bullets
with your chest. But you are able, at least with the right frame of mind, to
be serene and happy in the kinds of situations that make everyone else
miserable.
A delayed flight. A sick day. Traffic. A pandemic. These are things other
people dread. Parents certainly don’t look forward to them either, but they
always have this: they understand it’s more time they get to spend with their
kids.
All the inconveniences of life are, through the lens of our superpower, an
opportunity to hang out with the people we love most! Who can beat that?
In fact, delayed flights and traffic or a rainy day are some of the best
opportunities, period . . . because now your kids are trapped! Who cares if
they don’t want to spend time with you? You’ve got them where you want
them.
So don’t complain about the inconveniences. Enjoy them. They’re a
blessing. Now you get to spend more time with your kids.
November 7
There Must Be Hope
But you have to have hope. You have to be optimistic in order to continue to
move forward.
—JOHN LEWIS
A lot has happened in your life. It’s rightly made you cynical about some
things, be it politics, relationships, or other people. A lot has happened in
history too, and anyone who has ever read a book will have trouble shaking
the fact that a lot of lies have been told, a lot of horrible rigging of the
system has happened, and a lot of that contributes to the mess we’re in now.
But guess what? You have kids now and you don’t get to be a cynical,
angry person anymore. Because you’re responsible for the raising of the
next generation.
It is imperative that we give our children hope. That we explain the world
to our kids in a way that empowers them with agency, that shows them
progress is (and has been) possible. That as awful as things are, as the poet
Maggie Smith says, the world still has good bones. Like a good real-estate
agent, she tells us, we have to convince our kids that they could turn this
into something beautiful. You have to show them that they can make a
difference, then equip them with the skills, the resources, and the
responsibility to do so.
You have to teach them that no one and nothing is irredeemable.
November 8
You’ll Want Them to Come to You with Problems
Do you want to be the kind of parent whom your kids turn to when they
have a problem? You want them to come to you with their fears, with their
secrets, with their dilemmas, don’t you?
Well, then you better make yourself the kind of parent who has earned
that honor, who has earned that respect. Because it’s a privilege and not a
right. Need proof? Think about your own parents and how many things you
kept from them. Even more, why you kept those things from them.
Sure, some things we hide because we know it’s stuff we’re not supposed
to be doing. But a lot of it is stuff we could have used their advice on, that
we ached to connect over—yet we knew we couldn’t. They would rush to
judgment. They wouldn’t let us explain. It would trigger their anxiety or
their temper or their moralizing reminders. And we already had enough
problems!
You want them to come to you? You want to help them? Then show them
you’re worthy of their trust. Teach them that reaching out is worth doing.
Teach them that they’ll get a fair hearing. Prove to them that you make
things better, not worse.
November 9
You Will Want a Crowded Table
What a great spectacle it is when a husband or wife with many children are seen
with these children crowded around them!
—MUSONIUS RUFUS
It’s helpful to sit back and really think about what parental success looks
like.
First, of course, it’s having healthy kids who survive to adulthood—that’s
obvious.
But second, when you flash way forward into the future, what is it? It’s
that beautiful phrase captured in the title of the Highwomen’s hit “Crowded
Table.” At Thanksgiving. On birthdays. At some summer house on the
beach you all rent as a family. That is, having kids whom you get to see,
whom you have a good relationship with, whom you want to spend time
with . . . for the rest of your days.
If you want a garden, the song reminds us, you’re going to have to sow
the seed.
And if you want a crowded table, you’ll need to make the right decisions
now so they’ll want to make the decision to fly from their homes to yours
when they’re older and have families of their own. You’ll have to plant a
little happiness, give a little love, if that’s what you want to reap.
You’ll need to set the table today to have the one you’ll want tomorrow.
November 10
How Timeless This Is
What’s so wonderful about being a parent is how it connects us to every
father and mother and family that came before us. There is a line in one of
Seneca’s essays: “illi in litoribus harenae congestu simulacra domuum
excitant hi ut magnum aliquid agentes . . .” (“while children at the beach
bring toy houses to life out of heaps of sand, as though engaged in a grand
enterprise . . .”).
That’s the kind of timeless observation that a writer at the beach with
their kids would make. Seneca was spending time with family and he was
struck by the innocence and the metaphor of kids building sandcastles . . .
just as your kids build sandcastles. And with that, two thousand years of
distance evaporates. A father in ancient Rome, exactly the same as a father
in Pensacola over spring break or a mom at a public beach in Africa’s Ivory
Coast.
It can be humbling and comforting to take the time to think of these
moments. As you try to rein in your difficult teenager, as your three-month-
old falls asleep in your arms, as you nurse your daughter with health
problems through her recovery—the fact that this kind of thing has been
happening throughout human history should be heartening. They made it;
you’re going to make it.
What a tradition you are part of. Think how many parents have come
before you and will come after. We all struggle. We all triumph. We all
smile watching our kids play in the sand.
Parenthood, this timeless enterprise.
November 11
There Is Nothing Better Than This
Love is the only legacy that matters. Let’s not point our love in the wrong
direction.
—DONALD MILLER
Falling in love with your spouse is great. Making a lot of money is
awesome. Crushing it at work is the best. It’s nice to have a big house or to
go out and have a wonderful night with friends. But there is nothing quite
like coming home to your kids. Having them rush into your arms for a hug.
Feeling them fall asleep on your chest on the couch. When they climb on
your shoulders. When they talk to you about something they’re excited
about. When you hear them coming around the corner, excitedly saying
your name, and they jump into your bed.
Nothing’s better, as Bruce Springsteen put it, than blood on blood.
There is a lot of great stuff in life, but nothing is better than family.
That’s what he’s saying. The blood relationship is not what he’s talking
about. He’s talking about the bond. The people you’d do anything for.
So the question to think about today is: If this really is the best and most
important thing in your world, are you really building your life around it?
We pull extra hours at the office to get promoted. We take risks to make
investments with our money. We make plans to see friends or have fun. But
do we actively sacrifice and scheme so that we might have more of that one
pleasure that tops them all? Do we actively prioritize the thing that truly
matters most? Those moments when blood is on blood, when family is
together?
November 12
This Is Why You’re Here
Whoever wants to become great among you must be your servant, and whoever
wants to be first must be slave of all. For even the Son of Man did not come to be
served, but to serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many.
—MARK 10:43–45
Sometimes you get a glimpse into the lives of childless people and feel a
tinge of jealousy. How much more time they have. Even the acronym DINK
can make your mouth water a bit: dual incomes, no kids.
And yet? You know you made the right choice, not just because you love
your kids but because kids give us the most important thing in the world.
They give us purpose—a reason why we’re here. That verse from the
Gospel of Mark should land deeply with any parent.
We are here to give them a good life . . . and in so doing, make our own
lives worth living. So there is no need to feel jealous. If there is anyone to
envy, it’s you.
November 13
You Should Like Being Their Chauffeur
What am I, many a parent has asked their kid, your chauffeur? What do
you think I am, an Uber driver? It’s understandable—it can be a pain to
drive your kids around. To school. To a friend’s house. To football practice.
Sometimes it can feel like this is all parenting is—driving a little person
around . . . for free.
But instead of seeing this as an obligation, see it as a gift. For a bunch of
reasons. First off, twenty minutes in the car can be something you share and
remember forever.
Second, how often do you get this kind of captive audience? You guys
are stuck together! This is wonderful. This is what you wanted, right? An
opportunity to connect? To bond? To have fun? So use it!
Third, as many parents with older kids will tell you, something changes
when kids are in the car with you. Suddenly, you’re not the parent. You’re
just a companion. Kids will share and say things in the car they wouldn’t
say anywhere else. Or better, if their friends are with them in the car too,
you fade into the background and suddenly get to watch how your kid is
with other people. You’ll learn things about your own son or daughter that
you’d never know otherwise. You’ll get a glimpse into who they are in a
way they could never articulate to you directly.
The point is: driving your kids around is a privilege. It’s an opportunity.
Don’t complain about it. If anything, volunteer to do it!
November 14
You’ll Want Them Close
John Jay O’Connor III grew up in San Francisco. His family was local
royalty. He went to college at Stanford, just down the road, and returned
there for law school as well. So how did the O’Connors end up in Phoenix?
It wasn’t because he wanted to be close to the family of his new wife,
Sandra Day O’Connor—who lived as far east as one could get in Arizona,
on a ranch in the middle of nowhere. It certainly wasn’t because Phoenix
was a bustling metropolis or a paragon of culture—not in the late 1950s,
anyway.
The answer was simple. He didn’t want to be very close to his family. As
he later reflected: “My mother was a very critical woman, and I did not
want to listen to her time and again.”
We all want great things for our children . . . but most of all, especially
when we’re older, we’re going to want them to be close to us. How can we
increase our chances of that? How can we do our best to ensure the
existence of that lovely, crowded table we talked about the other day?
By being pleasant to be around. By not making our anxieties and fears
our kids’ problem. By loving them as much as we push them. By helping
them be who they are . . . not what we think they should be. By asking
ourselves, every time we feel like criticizing or judging or starting an
argument, Is this worth what I am about to withdraw from our relationship?
By putting them first, but not putting everything on them, we might one
day find them as close to us at our table as they are close to our hearts.
November 15
No, This Is the Special Part
In her wonderful book On Looking, Alexandra Horowitz takes a series of
walks in different environments. What does a geologist see on a city block?
What does a naturalist see walking through a park? What does a dog see on
a short walk around the block? But the most interesting walk was the one
Alexandra took with her nineteen-month-old.
The idea was to really try on her son’s perspective on the world. So they
walk out of the apartment, down the hall to the elevator, into and then and
out of the elevator, and across the lobby to the front door, where they would
start the walk. And as Alexandra went to check in with her baby boy, she
suddenly realized . . . that the walk had begun all the way back inside the
apartment.
To a kid, the world is a very different place from the one we live in and
walk through and, if we’re being honest, take for granted. This has more to
do with their size and their inexperience than anything else, but that doesn’t
invalidate their opinions and impressions. If anything, it opens a new
window for us to look at the world through, as it did for Alexandra. It
reminds us of how we felt about new things when we were their age. It is an
antidote to cynicism and world-weariness.
As parents, we have to appreciate the fact that our kids can help us see
the world maybe better than we can help them see it. They can help us see
that anything can be special and fun, that a walk doesn’t have to be outside,
that dinner can be anywhere and a cardboard box can be more fun than the
Christmas present it was carrying. We have to encourage this spirit. We
have to make sure we don’t crush it with subtle corrections and insistence
on the “official” way things are or should be. Most of all, we have to learn
from their perspective and add it as much as possible to our own lives.
November 16
They Help You Notice Things
It was painting that finally helped Winston Churchill slow down and learn
how to see. He had been so busy, so ambitious, that he had not cultivated
the eye or the discipline to slow down and really look at the world. Artistic
hobbies can do that for you.
Parenting can have the same effect. Nothing cultivates your eye quite like
games of “I Spy” in the car. Helicopters have been flying overhead your
whole life, but it was only when your son or daughter became obsessed
with them that you started to really notice. Do you think Sandra Day
O’Connor went out and gathered cicadas before she was a parent and
grandparent? No, it was the act of sending them off to curious children that
got her to appreciate this gross but fascinating bit of nature.
The things our kids like, the joy we take in their joy—it forces us to slow
down. To notice. To develop an eye. Because we want to point things out.
We want them to see. So we pay closer attention than ever before. We keep
our eyes peeled wider than ever before. We slow down in a way that, if left
to our own devices, we never would.
And for that we must be grateful.
November 17
Let Them See You in Your Element
I loved going with my father to the legislature. I would sit in the galley for hours
watching all the activity on the floor and then would wander around the halls
trying to figure out what was going on.
—LYNDON JOHNSON
What do you think drew Steph Curry to basketball? It was the time he
spent in arenas watching his dad play. The lights before the team ran
through the tunnel. The cheers of the crowd. The pounding of the music.
The sound of the buzzer. Seeing Dad do his thing. Even Curry’s obsession
with popcorn hints at a kid who spent countless afternoons and evenings in
NBA arenas, soaking in not just the sights and sounds but even the smells
and the tastes.
This is an old story, one as old as parenthood itself. It’s why blacksmiths
had sons who became blacksmiths, why as soon as women were allowed to
have careers, the daughters of teachers followed their mothers into the
classroom and soon enough into more and more elite professions.
So let your kids see you work. Expose them to the good and the bad of it,
even the boring parts of it. You have no idea what parts they’ll find
exciting. You never know what you might be opening their eyes to. Don’t
pressure them to go into the “family business,” of course, but give them a
chance to see how that business runs. Let them see you in your element.
November 18
This Is the Highest Praise
In the book My First Coach by Gary Myers, Tom Brady’s father, Tom
Brady Sr., was told some of the things his son had to say about how much
he enjoyed being with his dad growing up. Tom Sr. was visibly taken aback
by the remarks. They were that yearned-for confirmation that every parent
desires. As he said:
I think every father relishes time with their sons, and you never
know if the son relishes time with his father. For me to hear he
respects me, as much as I respect him, is the most satisfying
feeling that I could ever have. I remember when he was still in
high school and I would go in to wake him up in the morning so
we could go play golf. It was always the greatest joy for me that
he wanted to play golf with me. Years later, he made the comment
that, “I never wanted to stay out late on Friday night because I
wanted to play golf with my dad Saturday morning.”
If there is one way to judge, in the end, whether you’ve done this thing
right, that is it. It’s the ultimate test of a parent’s worth: Did you build the
kind of relationship where your kids want to spend time with you? This
isn’t something that you just throw up your hands and hope for. It doesn’t
just happen because your personalities magically align. It’s something you
have to work for—you have to create the alignment. You have to build the
relationship.
November 19
Look for the Double Opportunity
Bill Simmons is a busy man. He’s a writer, a podcaster, a CEO, a
documentary film producer, a husband, and a father of two. His eldest, Zoe,
played on a big-time travel soccer team. So every weekend for months
during soccer season, Simmons drove for hours around Southern California
to various tournaments. If you know anything about Los Angeles, you know
that traffic is a frustrating, nerve-racking hell on earth.
And yet Simmons wouldn’t trade it for anything. As he would say, the
drive to and from tournaments meant he had his daughter trapped in a
confined space for a couple hours where he could check in with her. How’s
school? Friends? Boyfriends? How are you feeling about things going on in
the world?
As parents, the one thing that is always in short supply is time. And Bill
Simmons’s time is as thinly stretched as anyone’s. Which is why he learned
how to double up on it. As we should too.
The jogging stroller lets you exercise . . . while spending time with your
kid. The drive to school  .  .  . is a chance to have that conversation you
needed to have with your daughter. All the chores that need to be done
around the house . . . are a way to teach your kids about responsibility. As a
parent, you always have to be looking for the double opportunity. Time is at
a premium. Resources are scarce. Don’t waste any of them.
November 20
You’d Do This Only for Them
The comedian Hasan Minhaj tells a story about taking his young daughter
to school picture day. She had a runny nose and was having trouble wiping
it. The next thing he knew, he found himself sucking the snot out of his
daughter’s nose with a Starbucks straw. As the sheer foulness of the
moment hit him, so did another thought: I would never do this for my wife.
We’d do a lot for a spouse, for our parents, even for a stranger in need.
We would do anything for our kids, because they didn’t do anything to
deserve being thrust into existence, completely helpless in the beginning,
entirely dependent on us for years. They didn’t choose to be here on this
earth. They didn’t choose us to be their parents. We chose to have them. We
made them. They are not just part of our lives; they are part of us. They are
of us.
There is something about this relationship that softens the hardest head
and warms the coldest heart. And while the relationship will change over
time—Hasan will not be sucking snot through straws a few years from now
—what will not change is the urge and the willingness to do anything for
our kids.
November 21
Do Not Be Afraid
The world is a narrow bridge, and the important thing is not to be afraid.
—HEBREW PRAYER
Do you know what the most repeated phrase in the Bible is? It’s “Be not
afraid.” Over and over again these words appear. They’re a warning from
on high to “be strong and of good courage,” as we hear in the book of
Joshua. “Do not be afraid nor be dismayed.”
A similar chord is struck in much of ancient Greek mythology. Some
version of “Be brave,” “Have courage,” “Don’t be scared,” appears more
than a dozen times in the Odyssey. It doesn’t matter which religion or
philosophy or great mind you turn to, you will find courage in the same
place the Stoics held it: at the top of the list of virtues.
It is impossible to be a good parent without having courage or cultivating
courage in our kids. After all, it is the environment we create for them, the
values we teach them, the rules we give them, and the bonds we forge with
them that will give them the courage to do and be the things they were
destined to accomplish and become.
Remember Barack Obama’s observation:
What makes you a man is not the ability to have a child, but the
courage to raise one. As fathers, we need to be involved in our
children’s lives not just when it’s convenient or easy, and not just
when they’re doing well—but when it’s difficult and thankless,
and they’re struggling. That is when they need us most.
None of this parenting stuff is easy. A lot of it is scary. But it is essential.
And it matters whether you have the courage to step up and do it every day
for the rest of their lives.
November 22
Everybody Is Going Through Something
At five years old, the future NFL linebacker Ryan Shazier started losing
his hair. It turned out to be a rare autoimmune disease called alopecia and,
as you can imagine, not exactly an easy thing for a kid to go through. He
was teased. He was looked at strangely. He felt different.
But one day, his parents helped him realize something. They said to him:
everyone is going through something; the only difference is that what
you’re going through is visible. Other kids had learning disabilities or were
going to bed hungry at night or had parents who were getting divorced. All
those struggles were hidden—perhaps intentionally, out of shame and fear
—but that didn’t mean they weren’t real. It didn’t mean that anyone had it
better or worse than Ryan. In fact, it meant they were actually all in the
same boat.
Did Ryan suddenly stop getting teased? Did it suddenly not hurt to get
teased? No, but it did help. It gave him perspective and patience and hope.
This is something we have to teach our kids. Life isn’t easy. No one is
dealt a perfect hand. Some troubles are visible. Some aren’t. But we’re all
struggling with something. When our kids understand this, they’ll feel
better about those difficult moments. And they will be armed with the
empathy they need to be kinder and more understanding of other kids too.
November 23
What Are You Even Fighting About?
There is no family immune to conflict. The problem, then, is not that
conflicts happen; it is how we handle them when they occur, how we let
these disagreements and miscommunications take on a life of their own. As
Bruce Springsteen sings in “Tucson Train”:
We fought hard over nothin’
We fought till nothin’ remained
But more hauntingly, he talks about how long he ended up carrying that
nothin’—something we’re all guilty of. So much of the stuff we get upset
about doesn’t even matter . . . and then because we get upset about it, we
end up saying things that do matter and can never be unsaid. We fight over
nothing and destroy everything we care about most.
You will want a crowded table when you’re old, we’ve said. Well, that’s
going to require some delayed gratification now. Some restraint now. It
means letting things go. It means admitting you were wrong. It means
telling your kids, your spouse, your own parents, that you’re sorry. It means
accepting apologies from them too. It means showing them how to patch
things up with their siblings, with other people.
We can’t let arguments take on lives of their own and risk their taking the
joy out of our lives. Life is too short, family is too precious, to destroy over
nothing.
November 24
Look for the Excuse
When he was a young teenager, Lewis Puller Jr. got himself an afternoon
paper route. It was one of those things that his parents insisted on so he
could learn responsibility and hard work and all that. And it was certainly
good for that.
It was also good for something even better. One day, Lewis’s bike got a
flat tire, so his dad (Chesty Puller, the most decorated marine in U.S.
history) drove him on the route. The next day, it rained, so Chesty did it
again. On the third day, Lewis’s dad got the car and drove him again
anyway—even though he didn’t need to. It was just the excuse he was
looking for to spend time with his son.
These are the excuses we have to look for as well. Yeah, you could have
dinner delivered . . . but going to pick it up is something to do together.
Yeah, you could put them in the carpool . . . but driving the carpool is a
chance to see them with their friends. You could buy their clothes online . . .
or take them shopping, just the two of you. You could run on the
treadmill . . . or strap them in the bike trailer instead and go for a ride. You
could tell them they have to go to bed . . . or you could stay up and watch
TV together.
Look for the excuse. Find the opportunities.
November 25
Don’t Let Them Sneer
The poorest way to face life is to face it with a sneer.
—THEODORE ROOSEVELT
It is so easy to fall into the clutches of forces like contempt and wallflower
nihilism and superiority. But this kind of cynicism, a wise man once said, is
really a kind of cowardice. It voids creativity, collaboration, and connection.
And we model it almost unthinkingly. Little comments under our breath;
making fun of stuff that makes us uncomfortable; rationalizing our
avoidance of things we’d rather not do or deep down know we don’t do
well. These choices are passed on so easily to impressionable children who
are always watching.
Our kids came into the world with fresh eyes, a full heart, and so much
energy. Don’t deprive them of these forces. Lift them up. Let them be
earnest. Let them care and try. Better yet, let them infect you with their
sincerity and the clarity of their passion.
Whatever you do, don’t let your cynicism infect them.
November 26
Let Them Take You Down a Peg
A proud man is always looking down on things and people; and, of course, as
long as you are looking down, you cannot see something that is above you.
—C. S. LEWIS
In the midst of the Civil War, Abraham Lincoln went to visit the defenses
that ringed Washington, DC. As he inspected the front lines, a Confederate
sniper took a shot at him—and, thankfully, missed. A soldier nearby
shouted at Lincoln, “Get down, you damn fool!”
It was a pretty remarkable moment in presidential history. As Gerald
Ford observed, “Few people, with the possible exception of his wife, will
ever tell the president he is a fool.” The office has the effect, he said, of
increasing one’s sense of self-importance.
One of the great things about being a parent—if you do it right—is that
it’s very humbling. No one knows how to cut you down to size quite like
your kids. They don’t care how rich, how important, how respected you are.
To them, you’re a goober. To them, you’re unfunny, old, and hopelessly
uncool. You’re someone they can make fun of. In fact, you’re who they
practice their sense of humor on. They’re not impressed with how much
you paid for the hotel room—they want to know if there is a swimming
pool. They don’t care how trendy a restaurant is—they hate that it doesn’t
have chicken fingers. They don’t want you to drop them off in front of
school, and they don’t think you’re clever. They suspect you don’t have any
idea what you’re talking about.
“No man is a hero to his valet” goes the old expression. Plenty of parents
are heroes to their kids, of course, but no one is exempt from their
children’s uncanny ability to size them up and cut them down from time to
time. And that’s a good thing.
November 27
This Is a Family Motto
It was one of those nights. The boys would not go to sleep. They had that
contagious energy that so often keeps brothers awake. The first time their
father came in to tell them to go to bed, they didn’t listen. The second time
either. More giggling. Fighting. Playing games. Messing around. Getting
into mischief.
Finally, the third time, famed college football coach Jack Harbaugh was
readying to yell—just like the father in the movie Step Brothers
—“RUMPUS TIME IS OVER!” And yet he didn’t. Instead, he just looked
at the boys, the future NFL coaches John and Jim Harbaugh, caught as they
were in the middle of their fun, and said, “Who could possibly have it better
than you two? You share, you laugh, you’re brothers, you tell each other
stories, you share your dreams. Who could have it better than you two?”
The boys answered in unison: “Nobody, Dad, nobody.” It was this
question that became the Harbaugh family motto, and one worth aspiring to
in every family, rich or poor, big or small.
Who has it better than us?
November 28
Family Doesn’t Hold You Back
It’s a pernicious belief that goes a long way back—back even to the
Buddha himself, who had to leave his family to find enlightenment. The
writer Cyril Connolly once said that the enemy of art is the “pram in the
hall,” that kids hold artists down.
While there is no question that raising kids is hard, that it takes enormous
amounts of time and energy—especially in a world where so much of the
burden unfairly falls on women—real artists and entrepreneurs and leaders
know the truth. Kids are not a burden or an impediment to success. They
help us. They give us purpose and clarity and, most important, balance.
The great Lin-Manuel Miranda and his wife had their first child just two
weeks before the first rehearsals of his smash play Hamilton. You might
think that this was a disruption or a distraction, but in fact it was the
opposite. Miranda told the filmmaker Judd Apatow in the book Sicker in the
Head that Hamilton might not have succeeded without this life event, and
Miranda himself might not have been able to withstand the success either.
Having an infant at home wasn’t a distraction; it forced him to ignore
distraction. “I had to say no to ninety percent of it,” Miranda says of all the
offers and party invites that came his way, “because . . . I had to sleep eight
hours and I knew I was gonna wake up twice and change diapers. My
family really saved my ass, because I think that’s how you lose it.”
So actually maybe family does hold you back . . . from getting in trouble.
From biting off more than you can chew. From thinking you’re bigger or
more important than you are. It holds you down  .  .  . to reality, to what
actually matters. It makes you realize that you’re loved, that you’re enough.
And as it happens, all of this can make you better at what you do.
November 29
It’s an Honor to Do This
They say that the reason people have long shaken hands with their right
hands was to signal that they came in peace and were not dangerous. They
say that when dogs roll over and show you their belly, it’s an indication of
trust and deliberate vulnerability. Funnily enough, it’s the same thing when
they look at you while they go to the bathroom—they are exposed but are
looking at you because they know you’ll protect them.
These might not feel like particularly meaningful gestures of respect and
love, but they are. It’s an honor to get them, even though we regularly
overlook their significance. The same is true of so many things that our kids
do. Think about how vulnerable and small they are . . . even as they get
older. Think about how helpless they are on their own.
The way they’ll let you pick them up and throw them, the way they like
to crawl into your bed, the way they call for you at night, the way they feel
safe enough to cry around you. These things are an honor. They are
incredible gestures of vulnerability and trust and love.
And you earned them . . . though you can never fail to keep earning them.
This is something you cannot let down and cannot take for granted. They
are a little fellow following you. They are looking at you with wide eyes
and an open heart.
Live up to the honor they bestow on you with their trust and love.
November 30
You Got What You’ll Want
There have been some iconic father-son moments in sports history. Tiger
Woods hugging his son Charlie after winning the Masters. Drew Brees
lifting up his son Baylen after winning the Super Bowl. Michael Phelps
running to kiss his son Boomer after making Olympic history. Tom Brady
screaming his son’s name as he ran off the field after clinching his tenth trip
to the Super Bowl. There are mother-daughter moments, too. Serena
Williams’s daughter, Olympia, taking pictures of her mom from the stands
at the US Open. Paula Radcliffe training for the New York City Marathon
(which she won in 2007) while pregnant.
Why do these moments give us the chills? Because we know the feeling.
It doesn’t matter what happened at work. It doesn’t matter what we’ve just
done or been through. The first thing on our minds is our kids. We want to
hold them. We want to tell them we love them. We want to share with them.
And here’s the other thing about those moments. Yeah, sometimes we
wish we had gone pro. Yeah, it’d be nice to make millions. To be famous.
To reach the pinnacle. But the real prize? These athletes all reach for one
thing . . . and it’s not the trophy. They want what you already have.
Sure, pursue your dreams. Strive to be one of the best at what you do.
Aspire to be great and successful and all that. But don’t ever forget that
when or if you get there, you’re only gonna want what you already have.
You can say hi to your son or daughter right now. You can tell them that you
love them right now.
It’ll feel just as good as a trip to the Super Bowl—to you and to them.
DECEMBER
TIME FLIES
(YOU COULD LEAVE LIFE RIGHT NOW)
December 1
Cherish the Garbage Time
We save and plan for elaborate vacations. We anticipate for months and
months. And when it inevitably isn’t as special or elaborate or photo-worthy
as we’d hoped, we feel awful, like we’re not enough, like we haven’t done
enough.
Yet the comedian Jerry Seinfeld, who has three kids, questions the
“quality time” that so many of us chase.
I’m a believer in the ordinary and the mundane. These guys that
talk about “quality time”—I always find that a little sad when
they say, “We have quality time.” I don’t want quality time. I
want the garbage time. That’s what I like. You just see them in
their room reading a comic book and you get to kind of watch that
for a minute, or [having] a bowl of Cheerios at 11 o’clock at night
when they’re not even supposed to be up. The garbage, that’s
what I love.
Special days? Nah. Every day, every minute, can be special. All time
with your kids—all time with anyone you love—is created equal. Eating
cereal together can be wonderful. Blowing off school for a fun day together
can be wonderful—but so can the twenty-minute drive in traffic to school.
So can taking out the garbage or waiting in the McDonald’s drive-through.
Cherish the “garbage time.” It’s the best kind of time there is.
December 2
You Are Constantly Losing Them
I saw the faces of those little boys who aren’t here anymore, the ones who lived
with me in the dreamtime of early childhood.
—CAITLIN FLANAGAN
Every parent’s deepest fear is losing their child. And the terrible, beautiful
tragedy of parenthood is that, indeed, we are constantly losing our children.
Day by day by day.
Not literally, of course, but in the sense that they are growing, changing,
becoming something new, something more independent. On a daily if not
an hourly basis. Professor Scott Galloway has talked about the profound
grief he felt looking at an old picture of his eleven-year-old. Yes, it was true
that his eleven-year-old was now a great fourteen-year-old, but the eleven-
year-old was no more.
Such is our fate. Such is the life we signed up for. We want them to grow.
We can’t wait for them to start walking, to start school, to experience all the
wonderful things that life has in store for them. Yet this also means that
they’ll never again be what they are right now—that what they are right
now is ephemeral and fleeting for us at best.
Blink, get distracted, take it for granted? It’s gone. You’ve missed it.
December 3
Think the Unthinkable
It’s fitting that one of the most important things you can do as a parent
would require you to think about a thing that’s very nearly impossible for a
parent to even consider. It comes to us from Marcus Aurelius by way of
Epictetus:
As you kiss your son good night, says Epictetus, whisper to
yourself, “He may be dead in the morning.” Don’t tempt fate, you
say. By talking about a natural event? Is fate tempted when we
speak of grain being reaped?
Of course, this is not an easy thing to do. It goes against all our impulses.
But we must do it. Because life is fleeting and the world is cruel. Marcus
lost eight children. Eight! Seneca, we gather, lost one early too. It should
never happen, but it does. It heartbreakingly, world-wreckingly, nobody-
deserves-it does. And it’s not that we hope Marcus Aurelius’s and Seneca’s
philosophical training prepared them for the pain of losing a child (nothing
can prepare you for that). What we hope is that this exercise meant they
didn’t waste a single second of the time they did get with their beautiful
children.
A parent who faces the fact that they can lose a child at any moment is a
parent who is present. They don’t rush through bedtime. They see it as the
gift that it is. They don’t hold on to stupid things. A great parent looks at the
cruel world and says, “I know what you can do to my family in the future,
but for the moment you’ve spared me. I will not take that for granted.”
December 4
Don’t Let Them Do This
They say it all the time. When will this be over? Are we there yet? Why is
this taking so long? Do we have to? It’s whiny. It’s annoying. You ask them
to stop. But in getting upset, you miss the real opportunity to teach them
and to explain to them what they’re really saying.
In his book Travels with Epicurus, the writer Daniel Klein recalls a
formative moment:
I remember one long-ago evening, on an overcrowded train to
Philadelphia, hearing a young woman moan to her mother, “God I
wish we were there already!” Her white-haired mother replied
eloquently, “Darling, never wish away a minute of your life.”
They’re kids, so they don’t understand how short a time we actually have
on this planet. Even you, as an adult, sometimes forget it. That you get only
eighteen summers at home with your kid. That you drop them off at school
only a little more than a thousand mornings. That you’ll get only so many
breakfasts together, so many trips to the store, so many waits in the waiting
room at the doctor’s office.
To wish that away? To waste those moments, those minutes? To want it
to be over soon? What a tragedy. We can’t take any time with our kids for
granted. And we have to teach them now, before they regret it, not to waste
a minute of this life that we have.
December 5
Tempus Fugit
This is our big mistake: to think we look forward toward death. Most of death is
already gone. Whatever time has passed is owned by death.
—SENECA
Every time you pick them up to trim their nails. Every time you take them
to get a haircut. Every time you take a load of outgrown clothes to Goodwill
or to a friend’s house. Every time you have to buy them a new pair of socks
or shoes, be sure to acknowledge the moment.
Notice what has led up to this. Whether it’s a few weeks between nail
trimmings or six months for a new pair of bigger shoes—what has
happened is a piece of their childhood has elapsed. That time has passed,
and it’s gone forever.
Now ask yourself: Did you spend it well? Did you live it? Were you who
and what they needed you to be?
The Stoics remind us that death isn’t just some inevitable event in the
future. It is happening right now. Every time they wear out a coat, every
time they outgrow a pair of shoes or a pair of pants. Those moments mark
movement. They are the score marks of the homemade growth chart on the
kitchen doorframe. They tick off opportunities for time together that never
come back.
December 6
What Would You Do Less Of?
The height of cultivation always runs to simplicity.
—BRUCE LEE
We spend so much time on stuff that doesn’t matter. Maybe it’s
doomscrolling on our phone or answering emails. Maybe it’s arguing with
your spouse, with your kids, with strangers on the internet.
You hate these things but you let them fill up so much of your life.
Marcus Aurelius, frustrated with some obnoxious thing that was consuming
his days, once asked himself, “You’re afraid of death because you won’t be
able to do this anymore?”
That’s the thing about tempus fugit (time flies). It’s so clarifying. If you
had unlimited time, maybe you wouldn’t mind spending two hours a day in
traffic. Maybe you wouldn’t need to steer clear of the cesspool of Twitter or
the bottomlessness of your inbox. If suddenly death were real to you—if
you were given a few months or years to live—what would you
immediately spend less time doing? What is the “this” that Marcus Aurelius
referred to that you would cut out?
December 7
You Can Find the Time
I didn’t see why it had to be either/or. . . . If you have a job in the daytime, you
write at night. It’s all a question of how much you want to do it.
—MARGARET ATWOOD
We think we’re too busy. We think it’s impossible. We’re parents now.
There’s no way we can start that company. There’s no way we can finish
that project. We have to be realistic. We’ve got to put it aside for now.
There just isn’t enough time.
As a young, struggling novelist, the writer Susan Straight would walk her
daughter in the heat of Riverside, California, until she fell asleep. For naps.
At night. It was the only way she could get her down. And the second her
daughter drifted off, Straight would stop wherever they were, sit on the curb
next to the stroller, and write in her notebook. She finished an entire novel
that way. Even as passersby would offer her money, thinking she was
homeless, she kept at it. Little did they, or she, know that the novel would
go on to win major literary prizes and launch a wonderful career.
We talked in November about how parents have to look for the double
opportunities—the ways to spend time with your kid and do what you need
to do. Part of that is also looking for the moments inside the moments,
when we can find the time, squeeze it like an orange for all it’s worth, and
get our work in too.
We can do this. We have to do this. It’s not impossible. It’s been done by
people who had it harder than us. Toni Morrison did it. Susan Straight did
it. You can do it. Whether it’s writing or going back to law school or
training for a marathon, you can find the time.
You don’t have to give up. You don’t have to be realistic. Just be creative.
December 8
It’s the Thousandth Time That Counts
I would have given anything to keep her little.
—JODI PICOULT
C’mon, Dad, again! One more time! Can we keep going a little longer?
Let’s start over! I don’t want to stop!
You’ve heard all these things more times than you can count. The request
for one more book before bed. One more time riding on your back. To
watch that funny video one more time. To sing that song once more from
the beginning. To hear the story over again. To jump in the pool one more
time . . . and then one more time after that . . . and one more time after that.
No matter how patient and indulgent you are, there will come a point
when you’ll want to say no. When you’ll feel like you have to say no.
Because you’ve got to go. Because this can’t possibly be interesting to
anyone. Because it feels irresponsible.
Maybe that’s all true. But you know what? Say yes. Even if it’s the
thousandth time. In fact, say yes because it’s the thousandth time. Because
that’s the time that counts.
You never know when you’ll get another time. None of us know how
long we’ve got. None of us know how many more times we have. So say
yes. Make this thousandth one count like it was the first.
December 9
What Will You Regret?
To have a child is the greatest honor and responsibility that can be bestowed upon
any living being.
—CHRISTOPHER PAOLINI
On their deathbeds, parents think about a lot of things. They think about
the world they’re leaving to their sons and daughters. They think about how
they parented. They think about the mistakes they made. They think about
what they did right. They are warmed by the thoughts of their children, and
if they are lucky, they find themselves surrounded by them.
The question for you to think about today, on a day hopefully quite far
from that moment, is: What decisions are you making now, and how will
you think about them then? Think about what most parents regret as they
come to the end of life: They wish they’d expressed their love for their kids
more. They regret not spending more time with their kids. They regret not
telling them often enough how proud of them they were. They regret taking
things too seriously. They regret letting petty differences or petty problems
loom larger than the love that they felt in their hearts. They regret not being
present, spending all that energy trying to organize perfect “quality” time
when there was so much ordinary, wonderful garbage time to be had. They
regret spoiling their kids, not teaching them the right lessons, not having the
conversations that needed to be had.
Well, you’re lucky. Because you’re not on your deathbed right now. It’s
not too late. Nor is it ever too early. Today you can adjust and change to
make sure you don’t have those regrets—or at least you can seek to
minimize them.
December 10
Why Are You Rushing?
The trees are coming into leaf. . . . Their greenness is a kind of grief.
—PHILIP LARKIN
We’re always in a rush. We have to get them ready for school. We have to
get them off to bed. We have to get to the airport. We have to get back
inside. We have to finish up dinner.
We are, as parents, it seems, perpetually short of time and always eager to
get to the next thing. But it’s worth stopping and thinking today about what
we are actually rushing to and what we are rushing away from. You’re
wrapping up bedtime quickly—why? So you can sit and watch Netflix after
they’re asleep? You cannot stand for them to be late to school—why? Fear
of other parents judging you? You want to be to the airport how early? And
for what reason? Because it recommends doing so on your ticket?
When we rush, we should know that we are hurrying through life. We are
zipping through their childhood—the exact thing that we will stop and miss
at some point not long from now. How much of this will seem important
then? How much would we give to get back a few of the minutes that right
now we seem to want to be over as quickly as possible?
So slow down. Savor it.
December 11
The Present Is Pleasurable Enough
This is the real secret of life—to be completely engaged with what you are doing
in the here and now.
—ALAN WATTS
After a long and arduous hunt in 1888, Theodore Roosevelt finally got the
bull caribou he had been tracking. “It was one of those moments,” he later
wrote, “that repay the hunter for days of toil and hardship; that is if he
needs repayment, and does not find life in the wilderness pleasure enough
in itself.”
A hunter who enjoys only bagging their quarry is likely to be a
disappointed hunter, nine times out of ten. More important, they are a blind
and deaf hunter who needlessly misses out on the majesty of life outdoors.
And the parent who thinks this is an occupation you “win,” who believes
parenting is measured mostly by those special, big moments, is missing a
lot of majestic life as well.
It’s not about the future, about getting through the terrible twos or terrible
teens to some idyllic end result. The next milestone is not there to assure us
the days of toil and hardship were worth it. We can’t forget to notice and
appreciate the little pleasures of the experience, the right here and now.
Find pleasure enough in what’s present today.
December 12
You Have the Time
You see how much time you have only when you stop thinking you have none.
—GUSTIE HERRIGEL
Every parent feels short on time. You have work, your marriage, your
relationship. You have your kids and basketball practice and lunches to
pack and baths to give. You have all those important conversations to have,
rules to set down, homework to check, and curfews to enforce. Plus, you
have your own health and your own interests to service.
Who has the time? you have probably said to yourself. How can I get it
all in?
You have to stop with this idea that you are rushed, that it all needs to be
squeezed in—because it’s the urgency and franticness that are actually
speeding things up. That was Gustie Herrigel’s powerful insight.
You see, it’s your desire to “squeeze it all in” that’s filling your to-do list
and making you miss opportunities. You won’t need to schedule as much
quality time with your kids if you realize that it’s all quality time. You
won’t need to go to the gym as much if you realize that running around the
yard is exercise. You won’t need to do a whole lot of things when you
realize they don’t really matter. And when you drop them, you’ll have more
space and more freedom.
December 13
Love the Little Moments
Enjoy the little things, for one day you may look back and realize they were the
big things.
—ROBERT BRAULT
The morning rush before you get them ready for school. The time you
spent waiting at a traffic light. When you were both hungry, so you stopped
for fast food. When they messed up, but instead of getting mad you sat
down as a family and talked. That weekend afternoon where you watched a
movie on the couch.
These seem like little, inconsequential, ultimately forgettable moments.
The background noise of life. Quintessential garbage time. But that’s
misleading. Just as one man’s trash (or garbage time, in this case) is another
man’s treasure, so can these little moments—if you decide to see them
properly and soak them in—become the big moments, the important time.
Don’t take it for granted. Don’t let your mind or your attention drift.
Don’t get too anxious (or ambitious) about the future at the expense of the
present. Just be here now. Be with them.
Treat the little things as big things. Because in truth, that’s what they are.
December 14
Is It Really Time to Go?
Whatever [my son is] doing right now, that’s the most important thing. So I
encourage him to keep doing it as long as possible. I never say, “Come on! Let’s
go!” . . . Of course my adult mind wanders to all the other things we could be
doing. But I let it go, and return to that present focus.
—DEREK SIVERS
Even the most patient of us gets bored. Or has somewhere to be. Or really
doesn’t see what makes this flower—the four hundredth one drawn in a row
—so special. So we want to prod our kids along.
Dinner’s almost ready. We’re going to be late. The game’s about to start.
It’s really hot out here.
We have to work to override these instincts. Because the truth is, most of
the stuff we’re rushing to is not that urgent. There is a certain amount of
Zen in that, which is valuable to us for its own sake. But with regard to our
kids, it’s also teaching them a valuable skill. Shouldn’t we want them to
develop the ability to focus and pursue their curiosity? Isn’t it worth it for
them to get a little dirty or for you to show up to the birthday party a bit late
because they were really, intensely alive for a few minutes?
Encourage your kids. Resist the urge to hurry. It’s not really time to go.
You’re exactly where you—and they—need to be.
December 15
Every Moment Is the Same
Always hold fast to the present. Every situation, indeed every moment, is of
infinite value, for it is the representative of a whole eternity.
—GOETHE
With bills to pay or traffic to wait through, a colicky baby or a resentful
teenager, it can be hard to feel that the moment right in front of you is a gift.
But indeed, these are wonderful moments. We must, as Goethe put it, hold
fast to them.
That’s what parenting is. It’s right now. It’s whatever you’re doing in this
moment. Always.
Driving them to school. Folding laundry. Getting some quiet time before
they wake up. Putting them back to bed when they wake up in the middle of
the night. Sending them to their room. Taking away their phone because
their grades have slipped. This is all it. This is all part of the job. And every
one of these moments is wonderful. Every one of these moments is a gift.
All of it is right now. It’s being presented to you at this very moment.
December 16
You Must Amend Your Life
This great Robert Southwell poem is a haunting reminder to all parents:
My ancestors are turned to clay,
And many of my mates are gone;
My youngers daily drop away,
And can I think to ’scape alone?
No, no, I know that I must die,
And yet my life amend not I.
Do you parent according to the unpleasant fact that we will not be here
forever, or are you more like Southwell? Are you in denial, struggling to
accept the only fact that matters and to amend your life accordingly?
When you wake up each morning, when you walk through the front door
each night, forget what you were bothered about at work. Forget what is
happening in the news. Forget what you and your spouse are fighting about.
Be with your kids. Be with your family.
Life is short. Your family is what matters. Your kids are what matters. So
forget all the things you’d like to do “someday.” Do them with your kids
now.
December 17
This Could Be the Moment
The simple things are also the most extraordinary things.
—PAULO COELHO
You’re busy. It’s just a trip to the store. Your kids have been a pain all day.
You’re trying to get ready to give them a special surprise. And because of
what you’re trying to do, get through, or plan, you’re not thinking about
right now. You’re thinking about later. Is that so bad? In theory, of course
not. The problem is that, in reality, this moment may be the moment.
Think of your own childhood. Think of what stands out. Is it the big
moments? The big conversations? Or is it ordinary experiences, ordinary
interactions—ones your own parents don’t even recall—that have somehow
wormed into your memory?
Like when your dad skipped work and took you to a random midweek
baseball game. When Mom made breakfast for dinner—your favorite—for
no reason in particular. Or conversely, when they spoke to you sharply,
when you saw them do something bad, when you were made to feel a
certain way you’d never felt before.
Every moment is a chance to parent. Indeed, you are shaping them in
every moment, whether you intend to or not. Every moment could be the
moment. So you can’t rush through them, you can’t assume they don’t
matter, you can’t lower your standards for yourself. Because this could be
the last, best moment you get.
December 18
Try to See It This Way
At the end of Death Be Not Proud, John Gunther’s memoir about his son’s
life, Gunther’s wife, Frances, writes, “Johnny lay dying of a brain tumor for
fifteen months. He was in his seventeenth year. I never kissed him
goodnight without wondering whether I should see him alive in the
morning. I greeted him each morning as though he were newly born to me,
a re-gift of God. Each day he lived was a blessed day of grace.”
Hopefully, thankfully, most of us will not have to go through what that
family did. But we can and we must try to practice what they practiced.
Because you never know. Wouldn’t it be better to see each day this way, that
each day with them is a gift, a lucky break, a midnight reprieve, as opposed
to a chore?
Act tonight as if it were your last time together. Soak it in. Appreciate it.
Be everything they need. And then in the morning, arise and be surprised,
grateful, blessed, by the grace of another try. Then live accordingly.
December 19
Do Your Future Self This Favor
At some point you will look back at this moment in your kids’ lives with
the misty wistfulness of nostalgia. It doesn’t matter what the future holds
for them, or which paths they take; you will look back at this time with a
sense of longing.
It’s just a fact. Because they’ll never be two again. Or twelve. Or twenty-
five. You get only so many bedtimes, so many baths, so many drives to
school, so many vacations, so many evenings on the couch, so many times
in the garage trying to fix something they asked for your help with. In the
end, we will all wish we could go back in time to get just one more of any
of those moments.
Well, that can’t happen. But there is a way that we can travel to the
future, or at least speak to the future. As the great author of children’s books
Adam Rubin has said: we can, by the choices we make today, tell our future
selves that we did everything we could. That we soaked it in. That we didn’t
rush through it. That we told them what they meant to us.
Do your future self the favor of a lifetime. Don’t take this moment for
granted. Don’t let your temper rule. Don’t be stubborn. Don’t value the
wrong things. Love now, while you can. Embrace the moment while you
can. Don’t rush away from it while it’s still here.
December 20
They Could Be Your Last Words
On January 8, 2022, about to go onstage to perform stand-up, Bob Saget
—legendary comedian, longtime host of America’s Funniest Home Videos,
and Danny Tanner on Full House—got a text from his daughter. We don’t
know what she said, but it wasn’t urgent.
He could have easily said to himself, I’ll respond later. I’ll call her in the
morning. We’ve all done it. We’re running late. We’re processing emails
when they call from the other room. We’re about to go into a meeting when
they text us. We’re tired and we rush through our good-nights.
We tell ourselves that we’ll respond in a little bit. We tell ourselves that
we’ll have another chance, that there will be other phone calls, other texts,
more good-nights. But that’s not always true.
Saget took a second to send what neither of them could have known
would be his last text. “Thank u,” he wrote. “Love u. Showtime!” Hours
later, he’d be found dead, tragically, in his Orlando hotel room at age sixty-
five.
No one knows what their last words will be. No one knows how much
time they have. So let’s use the time we have, before we lose the time we’re
never guaranteed. Let’s make sure we tell our kids how we feel about them
while we can.
December 21
They Learned This Lesson For You
There are people who have seen their children die.
—MARY LAURA PHILPOTT
The comedian and actor Rob Delaney’s son, Henry, was healthy and
beautiful, but then he got sick. Delaney and his wife, Leah, didn’t know
what to do, so they took Henry to the doctor. It took a long time but,
eventually, the doctor found that Henry had a brain tumor. They operated on
it and he got better. But sadly, the tumor took Henry’s life at just two years
old.
On Marc Maron’s podcast, Rob shared how his perspective changed
following Henry’s death:
I hold my children, and I hold my wife, and I know that they will
die. And I know that it could happen before I die. So I know that
our time together is finite. It will end. And so I appreciate them so
much more. I marvel at the fact that these particular collections of
cells coalesced around these souls for a temporary period, and I’m
so lucky to get to be here at the same time as the little collection
of cells and bones and nostril hairs. And so I really make the most
of it in a way I didn’t before. And I wish that that skill didn’t
come from something so painful. But it did. That was the price
tag for me to receive that gift. And now I have it, and I appreciate
it.
When we appreciate how little time we have with our loved ones, we can
make the most of that finite amount of time. Families like the Gunthers and
the Delaneys, as well as quietly grieving families all around you, have
learned painful and powerful lessons. We can’t take their pain away, but we
can heed it. We can do our best to appreciate it from afar, what they paid for
it, and apply its wisdom in our own lives.
Remind yourself this morning and every morning: this will end. Tempus
fugit. Memento mori. Then go marvel at the collections of cells coalesced
around the souls of those you love. Make the most of your time with them.
December 22
What Is More Important?
Life is short. Do not forget about the most important things in our life, living for
other people and doing good for them.
—MARCUS AURELIUS
Your kid wants to go swimming, but you have to make this phone call.
Your kids want to wrestle, but you have to cook dinner. Your kids want you
to come tuck them in, but it’s a tie game with forty-two seconds left in
regulation.
We pick these things because they’re urgent. Because they’ll only take a
second. But mostly, we pick them because we can get away with it.
If something seemingly more urgent or out-of-control were to intervene,
you would push the phone call. If you were stuck in traffic, you would order
delivery. If the boss called and needed something, you would find out later
who won the game. Yet here you are, telling your kid (and their earnest
request to spend time with you) that they are not as important. Here you are
choosing it over your kid.
Most of whatever we’re doing can wait. Not indefinitely, of course. No
one is telling you to put it off forever. But this moment right now, you won’t
get back. Take it. Play. Sit with them. Talk with them. Pause the TV. Save
the draft and come back to it. Let dinner get cold. Tell so-and-so you’ll have
to call them back.
Your kids are more important.
December 23
You Can’t Put Things Off
Do you know what one of the last things Abraham Lincoln ever said was?
As he sat in the box at Ford’s Theatre, waiting for the play to start, Lincoln
turned to his wife and said, “How I should like to visit Jerusalem
sometime.”
Within minutes, an assassin would fire a bullet into his brain. Within
hours, he would be dead.
Just as you have your many reasons for why you are waiting to do this or
delaying doing that, Lincoln had his. And yet life has a way of stripping all
our reasons bare, of humbling our plans and assumptions. We must live, as
Marcus Aurelius said, as if death hangs over us. We must parent this way,
too. Because it does hang over us. We cannot put off until tomorrow, he
said, what we can do today—whether that’s being good (our highest
priority) or telling people we love them or taking them to the places we’ve
always wanted to see.
December 24
It’s Not About the Stuff
I’ve never met a thirteen-year-old who said, “My dad was never around because
he was always working, but I have a sweet mountain bike so it was all worth it.”
—JON ACUFF
You work very hard and are able to provide. Not just the basic necessities
but all sorts of extras. Because of you, your kids have a swimming pool.
They have nice vacations. They have a big TV downstairs with lots of
channels. They have all this and more.
And yet it doesn’t matter.
It’s not the swimming pool they want; it’s you in the swimming pool with
them. It’s being in the motel room eating snacks, together, wherever you
happen to be, that they really want. The TV is great, but not as a substitute
for Dad.
The stuff you get them is great. It is not, no matter how nice it is, a
substitute. It is not the point. They’d rather play in an inflatable pool from
Walmart with you than play alone in one with a slide and a waterfall.
They’d rather live in an apartment and have family meals together than feel
lonely in the best neighborhood in town.
They want you. They want fun. And you should want those things too,
because there is no telling how much longer you’ll have them to yourself,
or they’ll have you in their lives.
December 25
This is a Gift You Can Give Yourself (And Your Family)
When you were younger, for Christmas, all you wanted was presents.
Now that you’re older, now that you have kids, all you want is presence.
All you want is for your kids to be present over the holidays.
Paul Orfalea, the founder of Kinkos, is worth hundreds of millions of
dollars. When asked about his wealth, Orfalea didn’t talk about buying
expensive stuff or building a great company or taking exotic vacations. He
said, “Do you know what success is? Success is when your children want to
be with you when they’re adults. How many people have all the [material
stuff], and their kids don’t come home for the holidays? Come on.”
Success, as we’ve talked about before, is having a crowded table. At the
end of your life, success as a parent will be a family that comes together,
that spends time together, that wants to be around you.
So here on Christmas, and throughout this holiday season, take some
time to think about what it will take to have that. Think about the choices
you’re making with your kids now so that they’ll choose to fly from their
homes to yours when they’re older and have families of their own. Think
about the gifts you have to give them today—your love, your support, your
presence—to receive the gift of a crowded table in the future.
December 26
Forever Young
One of the reasons some kids are so unprepared for the real world is that
parents see the sweetness and innocence of a kid and think, I want to keep
them like this forever. They felt like their own childhood was too short, and
so they seek to extend childhood for their children for as long as possible.
It’s an understandable impulse, but it’s also a kind of contradiction.
Instead of enjoying how special their kid is in that moment, the parent is
thinking both about the future (their own) and about the past (their own)
and trying to figure out how to protect their kids from them. Instead of
being present, instead of seizing and drinking in right now, they are futilely
trying to hold back a tide that no one—not even the most dedicated parent
—can stop: time.
Today and always, we should remember that line in the famous William
Blake poem:
Hold Infinity in the palm of your hand
And Eternity in an hour
If you want your kid to be forever young, enjoy this moment here in front
of you. Experience it fully right now. Don’t give even a thought to what lies
around the bend. Because you know what you’ll find? That right now just
keeps on going . . .
December 27
This Is When It Matters
The Europeans of the past had some weird parenting practices. Michel de
Montaigne’s parents sent him to live with villagers as an infant. Jane
Austen’s mother breastfed each of her kids for the first month, then handed
them off entirely to someone else. Aristocratic parents delegated to nannies
and tutors and governesses until the kids were old enough to participate in
adult conversations.
What most of us understand now, either culturally or intuitively, is that
every minute you have with your kids matters . . . but the younger they are,
the more those minutes matter. There’s an old expression: “Give me the first
six years of a child’s life and you can have the rest.”
Imagine generations of parents who did exactly the opposite of this. No
wonder the past was so horrible . . . and people did such horrible things to
each other. The first thing their parents did to them was horrible! They
severed the first, most important bond a child has—the familial bond.
And think about what this cost them! Yes, kids are difficult when they’re
young, but it’s also when they’re the most fun, the most innocent, the
absolute cutest. So why are we so busy? Why are we working so much?
Trying to have it all—cramming in all the old things we used to do before
we had kids while we ask our parents to watch our children for us? We tell
ourselves that when our kids are old we’ll make more time for them, we’ll
have more freedom—and besides, they’ll appreciate it more when they’re
older.
No! Now is when it matters most! Now is when it counts! The earlier the
better!
December 28
This Could Be That Day
It was just another day on vacation for the Roosevelts in 1921. Franklin
Delano Roosevelt, then thirty-nine years old, in the prime of his career and
life, spent the morning sailing around Campobello Island with Eleanor and
his two older boys. They had quite an adventure. Seeing a small fire on
another nearby island, they rushed and put it out as a family. When they got
back, FDR and his sons raced each other more than a mile to a swimming
hole. And then later they jumped into the Bay of Fundy together.
For FDR, a busy man, these days were too few. This one, in 1921, took
on a special significance after the fact, because, as Doris Kearns Goodwin
writes in her book Leadership, within forty-eight hours, “paralysis had
spread to [FDR’s] limbs, thumbs, toes, back, bladder, and rectal sphincter.
Pain shot up and down his legs.” His life would never be the same. Never
again would he race his boys on foot. Never again could he play and sail
and dive with them without intense physical pain. In fact, he very nearly
died.
The hard truth is that today could be that day for us. We have no idea
what viruses or diseases are already making their way through our bodies.
We have no idea what awaits us at the top of the stairs or around the corner
or across the street. So we must enjoy every moment with our kids. We
must give everything we have to being a parent and relish the joy they bring
us.
December 29
This Is the Eulogy You Get to Hear
It was an early summer night in 1967. The Stafford family was all together.
They’d had dinner. They’d laughed. They’d caught up on their day. And
then the parents headed to bed while the kids kept the evening going.
It’s a scene out of millions of family vacations and reunions and
Thanksgivings and Christmases. In his diary the next morning, William
Stafford—the poet—would recount how wonderful it had been. “Last night
the kids in our living room stayed up to talk after Dorothy and I came out to
bed,” he said, “and they were talking about us, or about to do so—
benevolently. I happened to think: this may be the only, and is probably the
best, memorial service I will ever get.”
At the end of your life, success as a parent will be a family that comes
together, that spends time together, that wants to be around you. But
Stafford’s realization is a powerful one. Those evenings together? That’s the
funeral you get to attend. The family dinners, the long conversations—these
are the eulogies you get to hear.
Cherish this while you can. Cultivate it while it’s still possible. It’s what
makes life worth living.
December 30
What Can You Do?
When she was a soon-to-be empty nester mother of two, Mary Laura
Philpott wrote her belated reflections on what it must have been like for her
father, who worked high up in the federal government during the Cold War
preparing for how to protect the president during a nuclear attack on the
Capitol. She tried to imagine how he must have carried on with his work
knowing that he was, in fact, preparing for the very end of the world and
almost certainly of his own DC-based family.
This paragraph is worth reproducing in full:
What do we do, then, if we cannot stop time or prevent every
loss? We carry on with ordinary acts of everyday caretaking. I
cannot shield my beloveds forever, but I can make them lunch
today. I can teach a teenager to drive. I can take someone to a
doctor appointment, fix the big crack in the ceiling when it begins
to leak, and tuck everyone in at night until I can’t anymore. I can
do small acts of nurturing that stand in for big, impossible acts of
permanent protection, because the closest thing to lasting shelter
we can offer one another is love, as deep and wide and in as many
forms as we can give it. We take care of who we can and what we
can.
All you can do is keep on keeping on. Love. Try to be present. Do your
best. Protect them. Take care of them. Ignore everything else.
December 31
Begin Anew, While You Can
Each haircut, each set of outgrown clothes, each round of spring cleaning,
each start of a new sports season is marking a passage of time. It’s moving
us closer to that thing we dread: our kids growing up, our kids leaving, our
final parting.
But the point of this message is not to depress you. It’s not intended to
take the joy out of the season. On the contrary, it’s to help you enjoy it now,
while it’s here. It’s to remind you of how important it is . . . and what a
wonderful opportunity it presents.
As Philip Larkin writes in his beautiful poem “The Trees,” about the
annual message the earth gives each spring:
Last year is dead, they seem to say,
Begin afresh, afresh, afresh.
The past is past. The last year is gone forever. The length of the future
remains, as ever, uncertain. But now is now. The new season is here. Let us
put our mistakes behind us. Let us work against distraction, addiction, and
busyness. Let us rededicate ourselves to the reason we are here—to
parenting, our most important job. Let us begin afresh, afresh, afresh.
Let’s enjoy this season with all it presents. Because when this year dies,
so do we a little, so does one of only so many seasons we have with our
kids.
Tempus fugit.
About the Author
Ryan Holiday is one of the world's bestselling living philosophers. His
books, including The Obstacle Is the Way, Ego Is the Enemy, The Daily
Stoic, and the #1 New York Times bestseller Stillness Is the Key appear in
more than 40 languages and have sold more than six million copies.
Together, they've spent over 300 weeks on the bestseller lists. He lives
outside Austin with his wife and two boys...and a small herd of cows and
donkeys and goats. His bookstore, The Painted Porch, sits on historic Main
Street in Bastrop, Texas.
What’s next on
your reading list?
Discover your next
great read!

Get personalized book picks and up-to-date news about this author.
Sign up now.
_143544563_
 
Your gateway to knowledge and culture. Accessible for everyone. 
 
z-library.se     singlelogin.re     go-to-zlibrary.se     single-login.ru 
 
Official Telegram channel 
 
Z-Access 
 
https://wikipedia.org/wiki/Z-Library
This file was downloaded from Z-Library project
